By Valerie Racine
Published: 2014-09-29
Keywords: bricolage
 Francois Jacob (1920-2013)François Jacob studied 
	bacteria and bacteriophages at the Institut Pasteur in Paris, France,
	in the second half of the twentieth century. In 1965, Jacob won the
	Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine with André M. Lwoff and
	Jacques L. Monod for their work on the genetic control of enzyme
	synthesis. Jacob studied how genes control and regulate  metabolic
	enzymes in the bacterium Escherichia
	coli (E. coli) and in lysogenic
	bacterial systems. He contributed to theories of transcriptional gene
	regulation, the operon model, and the distinction between structural
	and regulatory genes. Jacob also introduced the concept of
	bricolage (tinkering) in evolutionary biology.
Jacob
	was born on 17 June 1920 in Nancy, France. He was the only child of
	Thérèse Franck and Simon Jacob, a businessman. At the
	age of three, Jacob and his family moved to Paris, where he attended
	primary and secondary school at the Lycée Carnot in Paris
	from 1927 to 1937. His mother and his maternal grandfather, a
	decorated general whom Jacob later said he admired, were both
	secular Jews, but Jacob said that he became an atheist after his bar
	mitzvah. He later noted that he did not enjoy his time in school as he
	felt continually stressed by his peers' competitive attitudes. After
	his graduation from the Lycée, Jacob studied medicine at the
	Université de Paris Pierre et Marie Curie in Paris, France.
	He said that he was inspired to become a surgeon after observing the
	remarkable precision of a surgery performed by one of his uncle's
	friends.
Jacob had completed two years in medical school
	when, in June 1940, he left France to join the Free French Forces in
	England. The Free French Forces were a collection of military units
	organized by Charles de Gaulle in London, England, intended to
	liberate France from German occupation during World War II. The
	Forces participated in many campaigns during the World War II,
	including some in North Africa and in the Middle East, as well as
	the invasion of Normandy in 1944. Jacob's departure from
	France coincided with the death of his mother, who died on 2 June
	1940 from Hodgkin's disease. Jacob claimed that his mother's death
	and the impending German occupation of France marked the end of his
	childhood and the beginning of his adult life.
During
	World War II, Jacob served in North Africa, including Libya and
	Tunisia, as a medical officer in the Forces. In August 1944, Jacob
	was wounded in Normandy during his return to France. Jacob received
	the highest military award in France, called Croix de la
	Libération, for his service. However, because of his
	wartime injuries, Jacob would no longer be a surgeon. Nonetheless,
	he completed his medical studies and submitted a doctoral thesis in
	medicine in 1947, focused on the effectiveness of the antibiotic
	Tyrothricin. In the same year, Jacob married Lysiane Bloch, a
	pianist, with whom he would have four children.
The following
	three years were a difficult time, according to Jacob. No longer
	having surgery as a career option, Jacob was uncertain about his
	next pursuits. He took a position at the Cabanel Center, a former
	gunpowder factory converted into an antibiotics factory after the war. Jacob said that this was a futile project, as the
	large vats in the factory used to manufacture gunpowder were never
	suited to produce viable antibiotics as the vats had never been
	sterilized. Instead of continuing to work in the antibiotics
	industry, Jacob sought to move into a research setting. After he
	requested to work in Lwoff's laboratory at the Institut Pasteur in
	Paris, Jacob attained a research position in that laboratory in
	1950. Four years later, he defended his doctorate degree in science on
	lysogenic bacteria at the Sorbonne in Paris. In 1956, he
	became laboratory director and was later selected as head of the
	Department of Cell Genetics in 1960. In 1964, Jacob became pofessor
	at the Collège de France in Paris.
Jacob
	collaborated with Élie L. Wollman beginning in 1954, a
	partnership that resulted in their 1961 publication La
		Sexualité des Bactéries (Sexuality and
	the Genetics of Bacteria). The work presented their study on the
	genetic mechanisms and properties of lysogenic bacteria, which are
	bacteria that carry a viral genome within their own genomes.
During the 1950s, while Jacob and Wollman researched in Lwoff's
	laboratory on the viral properties in E. coli bacteria,
	down the hall Monod's group
	studied the properties of metabolic enzymes, or enzymes that
	catalyse specific reactions in the cell, with the same species of bacteria. In
	the summer of 1958, Jacob noted an analogy connecting the two
	mechanisms studied at the opposite ends of the
	institute. Both groups had constructed mechanistic models of gene expression
	guiding the synthesis of particular structural proteins, and in both models there
	existed an adjacent regulatory gene modulating the activity. In
	1959, Jacob and Monod published "Gènes de structure et
	gènes de regulation dans la biosynthèse des proteins"
	(Structural Genes and Regulatory Genes in the Biosynthesis of
	Proteins), in which they distinguished structural genes from
	regulatory genes. Jacob's student, Michel Morange, later argued that
	this distinction created a conceptual hierarchy among genes, which
	enabled researchers to categorize genes and genetic elements
	according to the different functional roles they play in the
	cell.
In 1961, Jacob and Monod published "Genetic Regulatory
	Mechanisms in the Synthesis of Proteins," and through their discovery of enzyme
	induction in E. coli, they introduced a logic
	of gene regulation and expression. Jacob and Monod investigated how these
	bacteria trigger the production of the enzymes that can metabolize
	different sugars, such as the complex sugar lactose. E. coli
	produce the enzyme, beta-galactosidase (β-gal), required to break
	down lactose, only when lactose is present in their environment.
Jacob and Monod discovered that a protein, which they called lac
	repressor, binds to the gene that produces the required metabolic
	enzyme and suppresses the gene's transcription and translation when
	lactose is not present in the environment. When lactose is present,
	the lac repressor protein detaches from the gene, and the gene's
	transcription and translation are activated to produce the metabolic
	enzyme, β-gal. Jacob and Monod concluded that these regulatory
	proteins act as on/off switches in gene expression, controlling cell
	physiology at different times and under different environmental
	conditions during the cell's life cycle. Jacob and Monod named this
	kind of structural-regulatory gene an operon, and they hypothesized
	that this kind of ensemble represents a fundamental mechanism that
	would be discovered in the cells of all living beings. They won the
	Nobel Prize in 1965 for this discovery.
Jacob continued to
	work on gene regulation in the 1960s and 1970s, and in 1977 he
	published "Evolution and Tinkering." In this essay, Jacob argued
	that the process of evolution by natural selection is more akin to
	bricolage (tinkering) than to engineering, an analogy he said was most
	apparent at the molecular level where the diversity and the
	underlying unity of life are most evident. Jacob argued that the
	action of selection does not operate in the same manner as an
	engineer accomplishes his designs. An engineer begins with a
	preconceived plan, or a blueprint, and proceeds by choosing or
	designing the required parts with the end product or function in
	mind. A tinkerer, like natural selection, must rely on the
	structurally and functionally imperfect parts of the world to
	reconfigure viable systems into novel ones. The tinkerer's parts, as
	opposed to the engineer's materials, have no pre-defined function.
	Moreover, the tinkerer can and often does find appropriate existing
	structures to add to other ones. For example, Jacob noted, the human
	brain is the result of an imperfect patchwork of a structure
	controlling visceral or emotional drives, the rhinencephalon, and a
	structure controlling more sophisticated cognitive abilities, the
	neo-cortex.
Jacob stressed the consequence of this
	dis-analogy between engineering and natural selection: evolution
	does not produce new forms from scratch. Instead, it usually
	transforms systems by reorganizing their components. Jacob argued
	that this process has been ubiquitous in evolutionary history,
	accounting for even major transitions such as the passage from
	unicellular to multicellular organisms. Thus, the lesson for
	biologists was to refrain from conceiving of natural selection as an
	omnipotent, optimizing force, and to pay more attention to the
	constraints of evolutionary history, including the molecular
	machinery underlying all of life.
In his autobiography, La
	Statue Intérieure (The Statue Within), published in 1987, as
	well as in a series of interviews conducted in the early
	twenty-first century, Jacob reflected on his career as a scientist.
	He claimed that Erwin Schrödinger's 1944 book What is Life?
	had the most influence on his transition from a student and
	practitioner of medicine to a scientific researcher in biology. He
	also mentioned that Julian Huxley's 1940s work on Charles Darwin's
	theory of evolution spurred his later interest in evolution.
	Moreover, he was influenced by the Lysenko affair in the USSR, in which the soviet
	director of biological research Trofim Lysenko rejected genetics as
	it had developed from Gregor Mendel's 1866 theories and forbid any
	scientists to study Mendelian genetics in the USSR.
	Jacob said that it irked him that someone in power would manipulate or
	distort science for political ends.
In addition to his 1965
	Nobel Prize, Jacob received the Charles Léopold Mayer prize from the Académie des Sciences in France in 1962, and he was also awarded
	a seat in the Académie Française in 1996. Jacob became a
	foreign member of the American Academy of Arts and Science and the
	American Philosophical Society. He also received honorary degrees
	from nineteen universities throughout the world. Jacob died on 19
	April 2013. 
 Sources Académie
		Française. "François Jacob-Biographie" 
		http://www.academie-francaise.fr/les-immortels/francois-jacob?
		fauteuil=38&election=19-12-1996 (Accessed 27,
		2013).
Carroll, Sean B. Endless Forms Most Beautiful.
		New York & London: W.W. Norton & Co., 2005.
Darwin, Charles. On the Origin of Species by Means of
		Natural Selection. London: John Murray, 1859. http://dx.doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.68064
		(Accessed September 25, 2014).
Huxley, Julian. Evolution:
		The Modern Synthesis. New York: Harper & Brothers,
		1942.
Jacob, François. La Logique du vivant, une
		histoire de l'hérédité. (The Logic of Life:
		A History of Heredity.) Pairs: Gallimard, 1970.
Jacob, François. "Evolution and Tinkering." Science 196
		(1977): 1161–1166.
Jacob, François. The Possible and
		the Actual. Seattle & London: University of Washington
		Press, 1982.
Jacob, François. La Statue
		Intérieure. (The Statue Within: An Autobiography.) Paris:
		Éditions Odile Jacob, 1987.
Jacob, François. La
		Souris, la Mouche et l'Homme. (On Flies, Mice, and Men.) Paris:
		Éditions Odile Jacob, 1997.
Jacob, François.
		"The Birth of the Operon." Science 332 (2011): 767.
Jacob, François, and Jacques Monod. "Gènes de
		structure et gènes de regulation dans la
		biosynthèse des proteins." (Genes of Structure and Genes
		of Regulation in the 	Biosynthesis of Proteins.) Comptes
		rendus hebdomadaires des séances de l'Académie des
		sciences 249 (1959):1282–4.
Jacob, François, and
		Jacques Monod. "Genetic Regulatory Mechanisms in the Synthesis
		of 	Proteins." Journal of Molecular Biology 3 (1961):
		318–56.
Jacob, François, and Élie L. Wollman. La
		Sexualité des Bactéries. (Sexuality and the
		Genetics of Bacteria.) Librairies de L'Académie de
		Médecine, 1959.
"Jacob, François (1920– )."
		World of Microbiology and Immunology. Eds. Brenda Wilmoth Lerner
		and K. Lee Lerner. Vol. 1. Detroit: Gale, 2003, 317–9.
Laubichler, Manfred. "Tinkering: a Conceptual and Historical
		Evaluation," in Tinkering: The Microevolution of Development,
		Novartis Foundation Symposium 284.   New York: John Wiley,
		2007, 29––34.
Mendel, Gregor Johann. "Versuche über
		Pflanzen-Hybriden" [Experiments Concerning Plant Hybrids]."
		Verhandlungen des naturforschenden Vereines in Brünn
		[Proceedings of the Natural History Society of Brünn] IV
		(1865): 329–34.47. Reprinted in Fundamenta Genetica, ed. Jaroslav
		Kříženecký, 1529–34.56. Prague: Czech Academy of
		Sciences, 1966. http://www.mendelweb.org/Mendel.html (Accessed January 30, 2014).
Morange, Michel. "Evolutionary development biology: its
		roots and characteristics." Developmental Biology 357 (2011):
		1329–34.6. 
Nobel Foundation. "The Nobel Prize in Physiology or
		Medicine 1965." http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/
		laureates/1965/ press.html  (Accessed January 27,
		2013).
Nobel Foundation. "François Jacob-Biography" http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/
		laureates/1965/ jacob.html# (Accessed January 27,
		2013).
Schrödinger, Erwin. What is life?. Cambridge &
		New York: Cambridge University Press, 1944.  

How to cite
Racine, Valerie, "Francois Jacob (1920-2013)". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-09-29). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8206.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Monday, September 29, 2014 - 23:06
 Topic
Subject
 Jacob, Francois, 1920-2013; Statue interieure; Logique du vivant; Monod, Jacques; Institut Pasteur (Paris, France); Bacteria; Operons; Lac operon; Genetic regulation; Escherichia coli--Genetics; Nobel Prizes; Free French Forces; France libre; People