By Zane Bartlett
Published: 2014-11-04
Keywords: Dolly the sheep, Karl Illmensee, New York Stem Cell Foundation
 Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer in Mammals (1938-2013)In the second half of the
	twentieth century, scientists learned how to clone some
	species of mammals. Scientists have applied somatic cell nuclear transfer to clone human and
	mammalian embryos as a means to produce stem cells for laboratory
	and medical use. Somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) is a technology applied in cloning, stem cell
	research, and regenerative medicine. Somatic cells are cells that
	have gone through the differentiation process and are not germ
	cells. Somatic cells donate their nuclei, which scientists
	transplant into eggs after removing their nucleuses (enucleated eggs).
	Therefore, in SCNT, scientists replace the nucleus in an egg cell
	with the nucleus from a somatic cell. 
Although Karl Illmensee first cloned a mammal in 1981, other
	scientists had theorized and developed the techniques needed for
	SCNT in the form of nuclear transfer. Hans Spemann, who taught
	zoology at the University of Freiburg in Freiburg, Germany, theorized about SCNT
	in his 1938 book Embryonic Development and
	Induction. Spemann proposed to transplant a nucleus from already
	differentiated cell from an embryo into an egg after removing the egg's nucleus. However, the technology required for this kind of
	experiment was not available to Spemann at that time, so he could
	not test his theory of nuclear transfer or SCNT. Robert King
	and Thomas Briggs developed the necessary protocol to conduct
	preliminary nuclear transfer at the Institute for Cancer Research
	and Lankenau Hospital Research Institute in Philadelphia,
	Pennsylvania, in 1952. The same nuclear transfer techniques serve as
	the basis for SCNT.
While researching how embryos differentiate in 1952, Briggs and
	King transplanted the nucleus from an early embryonic blastula cell
	of a Rana
	pipiens frog embryo to an unfertilized egg after removing
	its nucleus. To enucleate the eggs, Briggs and King used a small
	glass needle to puncture the cell membrane, enter the cytoplasm, and
	suck out the nucleus of the egg cell. Briggs and King then
	transplanted the donor nucleus from a separate blastula cell to
	replace the nucleus that they removed from the egg cell. Briggs and
	King observed that the embryo developed normally.
Researchers struggled to clone mammals using the same procedure
	that Briggs and King used on frogs. In 1975, Derek Bromhall in
	Oxford, UK, conducted experiments using rabbit embryos and showed
	that, after a certain stage in development called the morula stage,
	embryos produced from nuclear transfer died. Bromhall hypothesized
	that they died as the result of complications from the punctures
	made in the cell membrane during the transfer.
Scientists performed nuclear transfer only on amphibians until
	1981, when Illmensee in Geneva, Switzerland, claimed to have cloned
	mice using nuclear transfer technique. His work resulted in the
	birth of three live mice. Illmensee's experiments came under
	scrutiny and an investigation occurred concerning the veracity of
	his claims. Although the investigators never found conclusive
	evidence against Illmensee, the investigation cast doubts as to
	whether or not he had used nuclear transfer to clone the mice.
Scientists struggled to perform nuclear transfer on mammals
	larger than mice. Steen Willadsen at the Institute of Animal
	Physiology in Babraham Institute in Babraham, United Kingdom, was
	the first to clone a sheep embryo in 1984. Willadsen modified the
	technique of Briggs and King. After transferring the nucleus, Willadsen
	fused the embryo together using an electrofusion apparatus that has
	small electrodes that produce an electrical current. Willadsen
	coated the embryo with an agar jelly made from algae to reduce the
	damage caused by entry of the glass needle into the cell membrane.
	Once he had coated the embryos with agar jelly, Willadsen placed the
	embryos into the tied oviducts of a sheep, and he observed that the
	embryos were growing. From this experiment, Willadsen made viable
	mammalian embryos using his modified techniques, but they didn't
	grow into adult organisms. 
In 1996, Keith Campbell, Jim McWhir, William
	Ritchie, and Ian Wilmut at the Roslin Institute in Edinburgh, UK, used nuclear transfer techniques to clone a sheep that was born and gre into an adult. The team  manipulated a stage in the cell
	cycle called quiescence, when the cell undergoes a period of
	supposed hibernation and ceases to develop. Campbell induced
	quiescence in the donor blastocyst nuclei before transferring them
	to recipient egg cells by depriving the cells of proteins called growth factors. The
	change in the state of the donor nuclei before entering the
	receiving egg cells enabled embryos to develop to term in surrogate
	ewes.
According to Wilmut, the next experiment applied the same
	procedure to the nucleus of a fully differentiated adult cell as
	opposed to a blastocyst cell. The Roslin team hypothesized that the
	nuclear transfer procedure started by Briggs and King could be
	applied to somatic cells, thus becoming somatic cell nuclear
	transfer as opposed to just nuclear transfer.  The Roslin Institute
	performed this step in 1997. The result of the experiment was Dolly
	the sheep.
Dolly was the first mammal cloned from a fully differentiated
	adult cell. The main difference in the techniques producing Dolly
	was that the scientists used adult cell nuclei as opposed to the
	embryonic cell nuclei used in previous sheep experiments. After
	Dolly was born, the scientists applied these techniques in
	genetically modified mammalian embryos. Quiescence enabled the
	scientists to perform genetic modifications on the nucleus of the
	cell because growth factors were not altering the inserted DNA.
	In 1997, a Roslin Institute team used similar techniques to genetically modify Polly the sheep to express a human
	protein. After the success of Dolly and Polly, some
	scientists worked to clone human embryos using SCNT, however there
	were social, ethical and legal controversies over the practice. Many
	disagreed with the claims that scientists could or should clone, or perhaps
	genetically modify, humans using SCNT.
Scientists sought ways to clone human embryos without causing
	controversy. In 2011, Scott Noggle and his team at the New York Stem
	Cell Foundation in New York, New York, used SCNT to retrieve human
	embryonic stem cells. Although, Noggle's team did not perform SCNT
	using the same methods that produced Dolly. In fact, Noggle and his
	colleagues aimed to avoid the social and ethical implications of
	working with human embryos. Instead of removing the nucleus of the
	receiving egg cell before transfer, the scientists kept the egg
nucleus and inserted the donor nucleus into the egg cell. As a
	result, the embryo developed into the blastocyst stage where
	scientists could extract stem cells. The chromosome count, however,
	was sixty-nine as opposed to the normal forty-six, because it
	contained the chromosomes from the full nucleus as well as the egg
nucleus, which only contains half, or twenty-three of the
	chromosomes in a zygote. This result meant that the blastocyst could not
	result in a pregnancy leading to birth because the cells would not
	progress to a further developmental state. Embryonic stem cells are
	derived from these blastocyst cells.
Scientists report that SCNT is a plausible technique for creating
	human embryonic stem cells without extra chromosomes. In 2013,
	scientists in Oregon succeeded in using SCNT to reprogram somatic
	cells to become embryonic stem cells. After examining Noggle's
	research, Masahito Tachibana and his team at the Oregon National
	Primate Research Center in Hillsboro, Oregon, used the same methods
	that Campbell and his team had used to clone Dolly, but they also added
	a few extra procedures. The key differences were that they removed
	the spindle apparatus, which is a responsible for movement of
	chromosomes in cellular mitosis and meiosis, from the donor egg cell
	before removing the egg cell nucleus. They reinserted the spindle
	apparatus into the cell when they inserted the donor nucleus. After
	removing the spindle apparatus, they also added caffeine, which
	inhibits the enzyme protein phosphatase, which activates
	proteins that begin cellular replication in the cytoplasm. Because
	the spindle apparatus was removed and the cytoplasm inactivated, the
	scientists could perform their procedures without risk of
	premature activation of the cell resulting in cellular damage and
	death. The results of the experiment showed that the cells altered
	with SCNT reached the blastocyst stage and produced viable embryonic
	stem cell lines of normal chromosome count. As of 2014, doctors use
	this version of SCNT for medical therapies and treatment, described
	as therapeutic cloning.
Controversies due to SCNT largely arise from the possibility of
	cloning humans. In 2003, a private company called Clonaid
	headquartered in Las Vegas, Nevada, claimed to have cloned the first
	human baby, called Eve, using SCNT. However, Clonaid did not allow
	scientists to perform a DNA test on Eve to confirm that she was
	indeed a clone, and therefore many in the scientific community doubted
	their claims. As of 2014, controversies arose over the possibility
	of human clones from SCNT. Some criticized the scientists who used
	SCNT to clone human stem cells in Oregon. The Oregon scientists
	justified their research by claiming that their only goal was to
	produce embryonic stem cells and not to produce a fully developed
	human being. 
 Sources Associated
		Press. "Clonaid Baby: A Clone or a Fake?" Wired Magazine.
		http://archive.wired.com/medtech/health/news/2002/12/57001 
		(Accessed April 13, 2013).
Briggs, Robert, and Thomas J. King.
		"Transplantation of Living Nuclei from Blastula Cells into
		Enucleated Frogs Eggs." Proceedings of the National Academy of
		Sciences of the United States of America 38 (1952): 455–63. http://www.pnas.org/content/38/5/455.long (Accessed November 3, 2014).
Bromhall, Derek J. "Nuclear transplantation in the rabbit egg."
		Nature 258 (1975): 719–22.
Campbell, Keith. H. S., Jim McWhir,
		William A. Ritchie, and Ian Wilmut. "Sheep cloned by nuclear
		transfer from a cultured cell line." Nature 380 (1996): 64–6.
Huxley, Aldous. Brave New World. Cutchogue: HarperCollins
		Publishers, Inc., 1932.
Illmensee, Karl, and Peter C. Hoppe.
		"Nuclear transplantation in mus musculus: Developmental
		potential of nuclei from preimplantation embryos." Cell 23
		(1981): 9–18.
Lederberg, Joshua. "Experimental Genetics and
		Human Evolution". The American Naturalist 100 (1966): 519–31. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2459206 (Accessed November 3, 2014).
Nobel Lectures, Physiology or Medicine 1922–1941. Amsterdam:
		Elsevier Publishing Company, 1965.
Noggle, Scott, Ho-Lim Fung,
		Athurva Gore, Hector Martinez, Kathleen Crumm Satriani, Robert
		Prosser, Kiboong Oum, Daniel Paull, Sarah Druckenmiller, Matthew
		Freeby, Ellen Greenberg, Kun Zhang, Robin Goland, Mark V. Sauer,
		Rudolph L. Leibel, and Dieter Egli. "Human oocytes reprogram
		somatic cells to a pluripotent state." Nature 478 (2011): 70–5.
Schmeck, Harold M., Jr. "Review Casts Some Doubt on Cloning
		Data." The New York Times. February 26, 1984. http://www.nytimes.com/1984/02/26/us/review-casts-some-doubt-on-cloning-data.html (Accessed June 18, 2014).
Schnieke Angelika
		E., Alexander J. Kind, William A. Ritchie, Karen Mycock, Angela
		R. Scott, Marjorie Ritchie, Ian Wilmut, Alan Colman, and Keith
		H. Campbell. "Human factor IX transgenic sheep produced by
		transfer of nuclei from transfected fetal fibroblasts." Science
		278 (1997): 2130–3.
Spemann, Hans. Embryonic Development and
		Induction. New York: Hafner Publishing Company, 1962.
Tachibana,
		Masahito, Paula Amato, Michelle Sparman, Nuria M. Gutierrez,
		Rebecca Tippner-Hedges, Hong Ma, Eunju Kang, Alimujiang Fulati,
		Hyo-Sang Lee, Hathaitip Sritanaudomchai, Keith Masterson, Janine
		Larson, Deborah Eaton, Karen Sadler-Fredd, David Battaglia,
		David Lee, Diana Wu, Jeffrey Jensen, Phillip Patton, Sumita
		Gokhale, Richard L. Souffer, Don Wolf, and Shoukhrat Mitalipov.
		"Human Embryonic Stem Cells Derived by Somatic Cell Nuclear
		Transfer." Cell 153 (2013): 1228–38.
Weiss, Rick. "Human
		Cloning's 'Numbers Game'." Washington Post. October 10, 2000.
Willadsen, Steen M. "Nuclear Transplantation in Sheep Embryos."
		Nature 320 (1986): 63–5.
Wilmut, Ian, Angela E. Schnieke, Jim
		Mcwhir, Alexander J. Kind, and Keith H.S. Campbell. "Viable
		offspring derived from fetal and adult mammalian cells." Nature
		385 (1997): 810–3.
Wilmut, Ian, and Roger Highfield. After
		Dolly: The Uses and Misuses of Human Cloning. New York: W.W.
		Norton & Company, Ltd., 2006.  

How to cite
Bartlett, Zane, "Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer in Mammals (1938-2013)". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-11-04). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8231.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Wednesday, November 5, 2014 - 01:20
 Topic
Subject
 Cloning; Nuclear transfer; Campbell, Keith, 1954-2012; Wilmut, Ian; Roslin Institute; Spemann, Hans, 1869-1941; Willadsen, S. M. (Steen M.); Briggs, Thomas; Robert King; Genetic engineering; Concept