By Kimberly A. Buettner
Published: 2007-11-08
Keywords: Contraception, Reproduction, Biography
 Min Chueh ChangAs one of the researchers involved in the development of the 
		oral contraceptive pill, Min Chueh Chang helped to revolutionize the 
		birth control movement.  Although best known for his involvement with 
		“the pill,” Chang also made a number of discoveries throughout his scientific career involving a range of topics within the field of 
		reproductive biology.  He published nearly 350 articles in scientific journals.  His dedication to his work left him with little time for family responsibilities, although shortly after his arrival in the United States in 1951, Chang married Isabelle Chin, an American-born Chinese woman with whom he would later have three children.
Chang was born on 10 October 1908 in Tai Yuan, China.  As the son of a magistrate, he was able to attend university, and he received his bachelor’s degree in animal physiology from 
		Tsing Hua University in Peking in 1933.  After graduating Chang remained at the university to teach and study 
		nerve cells.  In 1938 he received a fellowship to study agricultural science at 
		Edinburgh University.  Because of his new found interest in 
		reproductive biology, Chang gladly accepted an invitation from Arthur Walton in 1939 to study 
		ram spermatozoa at 
		Cambridge University, where he remained until 1945.  At Cambridge he studied the metabolism, motility, and fertilizing capacity of 
		ram sperm, which had a number of applications in the artificial insemination of farm animals.  In the World War II era this research was especially important as it had the potential to increase food production.
In 1951 Chang joined 
		Gregory Goodwin Pincus and 
		Hudson Hoagland at 
		Clark University and soon the 
		Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology after 
		Pincus received a grant that 
		Margaret Sanger had secured.  The funding came from the 
		Planned Parenthood Federation of America to carry out research to develop the contraceptive potential of synthetic progesterone.  Because of his previous experience with animal fertilization research, Chang was a valuable resource for the team. 
In 1959 Chang was able to demonstrate that eggs from a female black 
		rabbit could be fertilized in vitro by the sperm of a male black 
		rabbit.  The fertilized eggs were then transferred to a white female and resulted in the birth of black offspring.  This series of steps revealed the potential of 
		in vitro fertilization and the influence (or apparent lack thereof) of a surrogate female.  In 1961 he was awarded a PhD in animal breeding from 
		Cambridge University based on his research on the effects of testicular cooling and various hormonal treatments on the physiological processes of sperm in 
		rabbits and some farm animals.  Chang also sought to understand the effects of various environmental factors that 
		rabbit sperm are exposed to during fertilization from the beginning of the sperm’s journey starting in the epididymis to its eventual endpoint in the female reproductive tract.  In addition to 
		rabbits, Chang also conducted a number of studies on the 
		in vitro fertilization of 
		golden hamster, 
		mouse and 
		rat ova.  These studies helped form the basis of the 
		in vitro fertilization of human ova by 
		Patrick Steptoe and 
		Robert Edwards, which later led to the birth of the first 
		“test-tube baby,” 
		Louise Joy Brown, on 25 July 1978.
Throughout his career Chang made a number of important scientific discoveries that influenced a number of technologies including the 
		oral contraceptive pill and 
		in vitro fertilization.  Chang received numerous awards for his contributions including: the 
		Albert Lasker Basic Medical Research Award in 1954, the Ortho Medal and Award by the American Fertility Society in 1961, the Hartman Award by the Society for the Study of Fertility in 1971, the Wippman Scientific Research Award by 
		Planned Parenthood in 1987, and he was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1990.  After years of dedication to his work, Chang died on 5 June 1991 in Worcester, Massachusetts. 

Sources
Asbell, Bernard.  The Pill. New York: Random House, 1995.
Greep, Roy G.  “Min Chueh Chang.”  National Academy of Sciences Biographical Memoirs, 68 (1995): 45–61.
PBS.  “The Pill. People and Events: Dr. John Rock (1890–1984).”  American Experience. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/pill/peopleevents/p_rock.html  (Accessed September 28, 2007).
Rock, John.  The Time Has Come: A Catholic Doctor’s Proposals to End the Battle over Birth Control. London: Lowe and Brydone, 1963.


How to cite
Buettner, Kimberly A., "Min Chueh Chang (1908-1991)". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2007-11-08). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/1667.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
© Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Wednesday, March 18, 2015 - 17:51
 Topic
Subject
Contraception; Chang, Min Chueh; People