By Cera R. Lawrence
Published: 2008-08-13
Keywords: Preformationism, Sperm, Ova
 SpermismSpermism was one of two models of 
		preformationism, a theory of embryo generation prevalent in the late seventeenth through the end of the eighteenth century.  Spermist preformationism was the belief that offspring develop from a tiny fully-formed 
		embryo contained within the head of a sperm cell. This model developed slightly later than the opposing 
		ovist model because 
		sperm cells were not seen under the microscope until about 1677. Spermism was never as dominant as 
		ovist 
		preformationism, but it had ardent followers whose work and writings greatly influenced the development of embryology in this time period. Spermism was and is now sometimes referred to as animalculism, a name taken from the term most naturalists at the time used to refer to microscopic organisms, or vermiculism, which comes from a specific term for sperm cells referring to their worm-like appearance. The most notable spermist philosophers and scientists were 
		Nicolaas Hartsoeker, 
		Anton Leeuwenhoek, and 
		Wilhelm Gottfried Liebniz.  
The discovery of 
		sperm in animal 
		semen was the result of improvements in the 
		microscope in the middle part of the seventeenth century. Many of these improvements were the work of 
		Anton Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch lens grinder and optics manufacturer.  The 
		Royal Society of London officially credited 
		Leeuwenhoek and his student 
		Johan Ham with the discovery of 
		sperm cells (then called seminal animalcules) in 1677. 
		Nicolaas Hartsoeker, a young Dutch microscopist, disputed this claim, saying he had first seen them under the microscope in 1674 but was not certain enough about what he had seen to make his results known at the time; 
		Hartsoeker had assumed at first that the tiny wriggling cells were a type of parasite. Already familiar with the theory of preformationism, Hartsoeker, Leeuwenhoek, and others began to investigate the sperm cells for signs that they could be the carrier of the preformed offspring instead of the ovum. 
The scientists conducting this research based most of their positive conclusions on the appearance of sperm under the microscope. 
		Hartsoeker is famous for a sketch of a 
		homunculus in the head of a human sperm, which he published in 1694 in his 
		Essai de Dioptriques, though Hartsoeker does not claim to have actually seen this preformed human under the microscope. Other researchers, such as Dalenpatius (pseudonym of 
		Francois de Plantade) in 1679, and 
		Nicolas Andry in 1700, did state that they had seen not only small humans in the sperm cells, but had seen that the sperm cells of each species they studied resembled the adults of the species.  
		Albrecht von Haller, a well-respected contemporary microscopist and an adherent to the opposing 
		ovist model, wrote that he had looked for this evidence in 
		semen, but had not found it. 
Besides the lack of clear evidence, one of the main problems with the spermist model was the implied wastefulness of human lives or human souls. If each human 
		sperm cell contained a potential person, critics pointed out, then millions of people were dying with each successful conception. This was enough to make many preformationists reject spermism in favor of 
		ovism, because ovism did not seem to carry with it that same degree of wastefulness. Leeuwenhoek and Hartsoeker tried to explain this resulting waste by pointing to the wastefulness of seeds in plants and of eggs in 
		frogs. When this failed to satisfy the opponents of spermism, Hartsoeker formulated the idea that is now called 
		panspermism: sperm that did not find purchase in a female’s womb evaporated into the air and became particles that floated until they could be recycled into active sperm. This idea was also propounded by 
		Wilhelm Gottfried Liebniz, the philosopher-mathematician and co-inventor of calculus, who tied it into his metaphysical theory of monadism. While this idea addressed the problem of wastefulness, it introduced even more difficulties for the spermists, who now had to deal with explaining the process by which these floating sperm cells with their preformed embryos could find their way back to the male animals of their species. Accordingly, 
		panspermism did not gain much purchase. 
		James Cooke reintroduced the idea in 1762, and his writings were satirized by 
		Sir John Hill in a paper called Lucine sine Concubita, detailing a machine invented to capture floating sperm cells.
The idea of panspermism thus failed to resolve the problem of wastefulness. Spermists in the 18th century turned to very different explanations. 
		Jacques Fabien Gautier d’Agoty claimed that rather than each 
		sperm containing a single fully formed embryo, there is only one embryo contained in each discharge of 
		semen, whose parts are present in the semen but spread out. A talented anatomical illustrator, Gautier produced a plate of a miniature horse he had seen in horse semen, and in 1750 published an illustration of the preformed human embryo that he said could be seen in 
		semen discharged into water in a glass. In 1765, 
		Jean Astruc wrote in defense of spermism, saying that it was the only way to explain heredity. Astruc also described the 
		homunculus present in 
		sperm as having no soul until the sperm cell unites with the 
		egg. This solved neatly the problem of wastefulness, but invoked the competing theory of 
		epigenesis by making both the sperm and the egg required for fertilization. 
The brief popularity of spermism marks an important episode in science history.  Spermism never attracted as many adherents as 
		ovist preformationism because of its problems with the implied wastefulness of God or Nature, and because no clear evidence could be found that a preformed embryo did exist within 
		sperm cells. However, the spermists’ work investigating the nature and function of sperm cells was instrumental in the progression of embryology. 
 

Sources
Needham, Joseph. History of Embryology. New York: Abelard-Schuman, 1959. 
Pinto-Correia, Clara. The Ovary of Eve. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997.
Power, Helen J. “Leeuwenhoek, Antoni van.” Encyclopedia of Life Sciences. http://www.els.net.ezproxy1.lib.asu.edu/ (Accessed June 3, 2008).
Roe, Shirley. Matter, Life, and Generation: Eighteenth Century Embryology and the Haller-Wolff Debate. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981.
Van Cittert-Eymers, J. G. “Hartsoeker (or Hartsoecker), Nicolaas.” Dictionary of Scientific Biography 6: 148–9. 


How to cite
Lawrence, Cera R., "Spermism". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2008-08-13). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/1802.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
© Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Wednesday, September 25, 2013 - 15:53
 Topic
Subject
Spermatozoa;  Concept