By James Lowe
Published: 2014-12-22
Keywords: Germinal Localization, mosaic theory
 "Experimental Studies on Germinal Localization" (1904), by Edmund B. WilsonAt the turn of the twentieth century, Edmund B. Wilson
	performed experiments to show where germinal
	matter was located in molluscs. At Columbia University in New York City,
	New York, Wilson studied what causes cells to differentiate during
	development. In 1904 he conducted his experiments on molluscs, and he modified the
	theory about the location of germinal matter in the succeeding years. Wilson and others modified the
	theory of germinal localization to accommodate results that showed
	the significance of chromosomes in development and heredity.
Wilhelm His at the University of Leipzig in Leipzig, Germany,
	proposed the theory of germinal
	localization in 1874. His's theory proposed that certain materials
	present in the egg during fertilization were responsible for the
	differential development that occurred after cell division. Biologists proposed various versions of the theory of germinal
	localization in the decades following His's work. His argued that
	substances are unequally distributed throughout the cytoplasm of the
	egg, and that the eventual production of tissues and organs can be
	traced back to those distributions.
Wilson debated these theories
	with Charles O. Whitman, the director of the Marine Biological
	Laboratory (MBL) in Woods Hole, Massachusetts. Whitman proposed a
	theory of cytoplasmic localization according to which the future
	organization of the organism was already present in the egg before
	it divided, a view Wilson rejected. Wilson
	conducted his experiments, and he analyzed the theory from the 1890s
	onwards.
However, studies by biologists such as Édouard van Beneden at the
	University of Liège in Liège, Belgium, and Theodor Boveri, at the
	University of Munich in Munich, Germany, had demonstrated that in
	the process of cell division, the division of the nucleus into
	daughter cells occurred with more precision than did the division of the
	cytoplasm. This result led theorists such as August Weismann at the
	University of Freiburg in Freiburg, Germany, and Wilhelm Roux at the
	Anatomical Institute in Breslau, Germany, to propose theories of
	germinal localization that addressed the nucleus as the cause of
	cell differentiation during development.
The theories of germinal localization were associated with the
	mosaic theory proposed by Weismann and Roux. They argued that the
	inherited substance contained in the nucleus of the fertilized egg,
	or zygote, was distributed unequally when the zygote divided, and it
	remained unequal in all subsequent cell divisions. This substance
	would cause cells to differentiate. Hans Driesch and
	Oskar Hertwig, both in
	Germany, rejected to the mosaic theory. In the early 1890s, Driesch
	found that the cells separated from the embryo at an early stage
	could still produce a whole embryo, indicating that the isolated
	cell still had all the materials needed for the production of the
	different cell types. Hertwig also argued that, in growth and
	development, there was not a qualitative division of the nuclear
	material, with some of it going to one daughter cell and the rest to
	the other. Instead, he proposed a quantitative division, where the
	materials in the nucleus were divided equally between daughter
	cells, having increased in number beforehand.
Wilson began to engage in these debates in 1893 when he published
	the results of his 1892 experiment with the marine invertebrate
	Amphioxus.
	Like Hertwig, Wilson argued that evidence indicated a quantitative
	division of inherited substance, rather than a qualitative division,
	throughout the daughters of dividing cells. He developed his
	argument in his 1896 textbook The Cell in Development and
	Inheritance. Towards the end of the book, Wilson discussed these
	theories, assessed them in the light of recent experimental
	evidence, and proposed his version of the germinal localization
	theory. He argued that the egg was initially isotropous, meaning
	that it did not have internal differences corresponding to later
	portions of the organism. Wilson claimed that from its formation to
	fertilization, the egg became less isotropous. He proposed that the
	pre-embryonic stages of an egg established the basic plan of the
	organism, the organism's anterior-posterior and left-right axes, and
	its type of symmetry. In 1896, Wilson stressed the role of
	conditions external to the cell, such as relations with other cells
	and nutrition, in these continuing arrangements of material. He
	argued that these external conditions accounted for the effects
	produced when experimenters changed the fates of embryonic cells by removing
	them from the embryo.
Wilson designed his experiments in 1903 and 1904 with the mollusc
	Dentalium
	to test the theory of germinal localization. In these
	experiments, he focused on what he called pre-localization, a
	process occurring before segmentation or cleavage of a fertilized
	egg. Wilson claimed that if he could establish the process of
	pre-localization before the embryo segmented, that he would
	demonstrate that the localization was a progressive, epigenetic
	phenomenon driven by the nucleus. In Wilson's view, pre-localization
	would disprove the theories of cytoplasmic preformation, according
	to which the egg was already organised at fertilisation with the
	formative materials for later parts already distributed to
	particular parts of the egg.
Wilson's experiment followed the method of Yves Delage, who
	worked at the Sorbonne in Paris, France, and who cut fertilized eggs
	with a scalpel. Wilson cut single cells of fertilized mollusc
	embryos into fragments, and then he tracked the
	development of the cell fragments. As with his experiment with
	Amphioxus in 1893, Wilson established the normal development
	of Dentalium. He prepared, stained, and sectioned the samples
	and then observed them with a camera lucida.Wilson used
	different stains to identify the presence of different substances in
	different areas of the egg. Wilson observed that, in normal eggs,
	the materials were unequally distributed, and that these materials
	moved within the eggs. These observations indicated that the material distributed through the zygote before the zygote
	segmented.
Wilson used his scalpel to make precise cuts of the zygote prior
	to cleavage, when the egg rapidly divides to produce smaller
	daughter cells or called blastomeres. Wilson used the scalpel to
	remove the polar lobe, a protrusion of the cell that contains white
	substance at the vegetal or lower pole which, after the first
	cleavage division, is attached by a tube to only one blastomere.
	After the second cleavage, it is attached to one of the cells, which result
	from the division of that blastomere, and it is then absorbed by
	the cell.
When Wilson removed the polar body at the two-cell stage, also
	called the trefoil stage because the polar body appears like a third
	cell, the resulting larvae lacked any of the tissues and
	organs which derive from a the mesoderm germ layer in normal embryos. Wilson found the
	same result when he removed the cell that absorbed the polar body.
	The abnormal embryos therefore contained no shell-gland, muscles,
	mouth, or foot. Wilson concluded that the polar lobe must contain
	certain materials, which help form the
	mesoderm, and he used examples from experiments with isolated
	blastomeres to support his case. When he observed the egg before
	cleavage, Wilson noted that the materials that went into the
	polar body were already visible in a particular part of the egg.
Wilson conducted more precise experiments to further explore
	these results. He cut horizontal sections through an area that
	contained the specific polar material. As a result, most embryos
	failed to develop, whereas some did. Wilson remarked that the ones
	that did develop into larvae ranged from normal size to one-fourth
	of the normal size. However, he noted that, despite the change in
	size, they were otherwise normal in form and possessed the
	structures developed from the mesoderm, while the lobe-less larvae
	did not. Wilson described this result as of the polar material
	spreading in the egg, so even if much of it is excluded by one of
	his cuts, enough remained to predetermine the mesodermal fate of the
	particular blastomere in which it was found.
When Wilson cut sections vertically through the polar area, he
	observed that the formative materials were stratified horizontally
	in the polar area. In a number of cases, Wilson's vertical sections
	yielded two smaller than normal larvae, each with all the normal
	structures, including those Wilson associated with the polar
	material.
Wilson concluded that the development of Dentalium was
	mosaic in character. He hypothesized that the prelocalized materials
	in cells determined particular cell types, tissues, and structures
	in the later embryo and larva. Wilson noted that although the
	different outcomes of vertical and horizontal cuts indicated that
	the polar materials were stratified in a particular way in the egg,
	their position in the egg did not correspond to the position of the
	structures they would determine in the embryo.
Wilson's results helped him to develop the hypothesis he had
	proposed in 1893. He argued that the pattern of mosaic
	development was explained by the movement of different formative
	materials into different parts of the egg before cleavage separated
	out those materials into different cells. According to this scheme,
	these materials would be distributed differentially to the daughter
	cells, explaining the process of differentiation. Thus, Wilson
	rejected the theory of cytoplasmic prelocalization and claimed that,
	as the localization process continued after fertilization and beyond
	the first cleavage stage in some organisms, localization could not
	account for the observed results. Wilson proposed that, instead, the
	segregation of materials into different regions of the fertilized
	egg must be a result of the activity of the nucleus.
In 1925, in the third and final edition of his textbook The
	Cell in Development and Heredity, Wilson discussed germinal
	localization, and he situated his work of 1903 and 1904 in a series
	of experiments ranging from the 1890s to the second decade of the
	twentieth century. Wilson showed that these experiments demonstrated
	the ability of cells to self-differentiate even when isolated, with
	developmental potency distributed along the lineages of cells
	produced by the cleavage divisions.
Wilson's account of these issues indicated that, by 1904, he had
	completed much of his theory of differentiation and progressive
	development. His theory stated that cytoplasmic localization
	resulted from the activities of the nucleus or nuclei. He proposed
	that the different modes of development, including the mosaic and
	regulative modes, could be explained by a difference in timing of
	the progressive formation of different organ-forming germ regions in
	the egg and embryo. This theory enabled him to explain how isolated
	blastomeres could be totipotent, even after the division of the egg
	cytoplasm into different cells after the cleavage divisions.
Thomas H. Morgan, in his 1934 book Embryology and
	Genetics, acknowledged Wilson's work on germinal localization,
	and advocated a similar approach. Morgan argued for an integrated
	study of the problems of development, centred on the interaction
	between the cell's cytoplasm and the products of nuclear activity,
	associated with genes on the chromosomes. 
 Sources Baxter, Alice L.
		"Edmund B. Wilson as a Preformationist: Some Reasons for His
		Acceptance of the Chromosome Theory." Journal of the History of
		Biology 9 (1976): 29–57.
Boveri, Theodor. Zur Frage der
		Entstehung maligner Tumoren [On the Development of Malignant Tumors]. Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1914.
Delage, Yves.
		Traité de zoologie concrète. [Treatise on Zoology]. Paris: Schleicher frères et cie,
		1901.
Driesch, Hans."Entwicklungsmechanische Studien: I. Der Werthe der beiden ersten Furchungszellen in der Echinogdermenentwicklung. Experimentelle Erzeugung von Theil- und Doppelbildungen. II. Über die Beziehungen des Lichtez zur ersten Etappe der thierischen Form-bildung." Zeitschrift für wissenschaftliche Zoologie 53 (1891): 160–84. Translated as "The Potency of the First Two Cleavage Cells in Echinoderm Development. Experimental Production of Partial and Double Formations." In Foundations of Experimental Embryology, eds. Benjamin H. Willier and Jane M. Oppenheimer, 38–50. New York: Hafner Press, 1964.
Driesch, Hans. Philosophie des Organischen. [The Science
		and Philosophy of the Organism]. Leipzig: Quelle & Meyer, 1928.
		https://archive.org/details/philosophiedesor01drie (Accessed
		November 20, 2014.)
Hertwig, Oskar. Lehrbuch der
		Entwicklungsgeschichte des Menschen und der Wirbelthiere.
		[Textbook on the Developmental History of Man and the Vertebrates]. Berlin: G.
		Fischer, 1896. http://dx.doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.3980 (Accessed December 19, 2014).
His, Wilhelm. Anatomie menschlicher Embryonen [The Anatomy of Human Embryos]. Leipzig: Verlag von
Vogel, 1880.
http://archive.org/stream/anatomiemenschl02hisgoog#page/n7/mode/2up
(Accessed November 4, 2014).
Maienschein, Jane. "The Origins of
Entwicklungsmechanik." A Conceptual History of Modern Embryology, ed.
Scott F. Gilbert, 43–62. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1994.
Morgan, Thomas H. Embryology and Genetics. New York, NY:
Columbia University Press, 1934.
Roux, Wilhelm. Gesammelte Abhandlungen
über Entwickelungsmechanik der Organismen: Bd. Entwicklungsmechanik des
Embryo. [Collected Essays on Developmental Mechanics of Organisms].
Leipzig: Wilhelm Engelmann, 1895.
https://archive.org/details/gesammelteabhand01roux (Accessed November
20, 2014.)
Van Beneden, Édouard. Recherches sur la maturation de l'oeuf, la
fécondation, et la division cellulaire [Research on the egg's maturation, fertilization, and cellular division]. Paris: H. Engelcke, 1883.
https://archive.org/details/recherchessurla00benegoog (Accessed November
4, 2014).
Weismann, August, Essays upon Heredity and Kindred Biological Problems. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1891.
https://archive.org/details/essaysuponheredi189101weis (Accessed
November 20, 2014.)
Whitman, Charles O. Methods of research in microscopical anatomy and
embryology. Boston: Cassino, 1885.
https://archive.org/details/methodsofresearc00whituoft (Accessed
November 4, 2014).
Wilson, Edmund B. "Amphioxus, and the Mosaic Theory
of Development." Journal of Morphology 8 (1893): 579–638.
http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/43594#page/645/mode/1up (Accessed July 30, 2014).
Wilson, Edmund B. The Cell in Development and
Inheritance. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1896.
http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/28152#page/7/mode/1up (Accessed July 30, 2014).
Wilson, Edmund B. "Experimental Studies on
Germinal Localization. I. The Germ-Regions in the Egg of Dentalium."
Journal of Experimental Zoology 1 (1904): 1–72.
http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/42867#page/17/mode/1up (Accessed
July 30, 2014).
Wilson, Edmund B. The Cell in Development and Heredity.
New York: The Macmillan Company, 1925.  

How to cite
Lowe, James, "Experimental Studies on Germinal Localization (1904), by Edmund B. Wilson". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-12-22). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8272.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Tuesday, December 23, 2014 - 00:45
 Topic
Subject
 Wilson, Edmund B. (Edmund Beecher), 1856-1939; Embryos; Embryology; Developmental biology; Larvae; Cells; Columbia University; Mollusks; zygote; Mesoderm; Whitman, Charles Otis, 1842-1910; Driesch, Hans, 1867-1941; Experiment