By Karine Prevot
Published: 2015-01-29
Keywords: Marshall Hertig
 WolbachiaBacteria of the genus Wolbachia are
	bacteria that live within the cells of their hosts. They infect a
	wide range of arthropods (insects, arachnids, and crustaceans) and
	some nematodes (parasitic roundworms). Scientists estimate that
	Wolbachia exist in between seventeen percent and seventy-six percent of
	arthropods and nematodes. The frequency of the bacteria makes them
	one of the most widespread parasites. In general, they are divided
	into five groups, from A to E, depending of the species of their
	host. They cause diverse reproductive and developmental changes on
	their numerous invertebrate hosts. Several mechanisms, like the
	feminization of the embryo's sexual characters, are involved in
	those processes. To reproduce, Wolbachia often exploit their hosts'
	reproductive processes. Additionally, they are symbiotic in that they are
	necessary for the normal development of organisms in some species.
In 1924, Marshall Hertig in Minneapolis, Minnesota, and Simeon
	Burt Wolbach at Harvard University Medical School in Boston,
	Massachusetts, first described Wolbachia in the mosquito Culex pipientis.
	They studied micro-organisms called Rickettsiae, which are intracellular
	parasitic bacteria that are widespread among arthropods. To do so,
	they examined several arthropods, including twenty-five males and
	females of Culex Pipens mosquitos collected near Boston and
	near Minneapolis. They observed intracellular organisms that only
	infected the ovaries and testes, and that were also found in the eggs. In
	1936, Hertig named these particular parasites Wolbachia
	pipientis.
In the 1950s, Hannes Laven, from the Institut für Genetik of
	Johannes Gutenberg-University in Mainz, Germany, discovered that
	some Culex Pipens mosquitos failed to breed with others from
	the same species, even when forced to in experiments, producing few or no progeny. Laven established that a incompatibility
	factor transmitted from parents to offspring through females only,
	and he named this phenomenon cytoplasmic incompatibility. In 1971,
	Janice Yen and Ralph Barr at the University of California in Los
	Angeles, California, found that mosquito eggs were killed when the
	sperm of males infected by Wolbachia fertilized non-infected
	eggs. In 1990, Richard Stouthamer at the University of California in
	Riverside, California, found that Wolbachia could make males
	dispensable for reproduction in some species, by feminizing the
	population and producing parthenogenesis, a process of reproduction
	that does not involve fertilization. Researchers began to study
	Wolbachia with molecular methods like
	polymerase chain reaction (PCR), a biochemical technology used to
	generate copies of a particular DNA sequence, and that enabled researchers to detect
	and to identify the bacteria more easily and rapidly.
In his 1936 article, Hertig had showed that bacteria could transmit
	from one organism to another in two ways. Most often, they pass from
	mother to the offspring through the egg cytoplasm. However, there
	are few exceptions. In some cases, bacteria transmit from one
	individual to another, even across species, regardless of
	reproduction. In all cases, the transmission increases the number of bacteria and, for the infected population, results in a biased sex-ratio, in which
	the number of females in the population exceeds the number of males.
	These bacteria can infect many different types of organs. Most
	notably, they infect the testes or ovaries of their hosts.
	Wolbachia are present in mature eggs, but not in
	mature sperm, so when bacteria are present in males, they are
	eliminated from the germ-line during spermatogenesis. Therefore,
	only infected females pass the infection to their offspring.
Wolbachia alter both reproduction and development of their
	hosts. There are several ways and several mechanisms by which those
	alterations happen. In some cases, the symbiosis is considered to be
	facultative, which means that if the bacteria are removed, such as
	with antibiotics in a laboratory, the hosts can still reproduce and
	develop normally. In other cases, the symbiosis is considered
	obligatory, which means that the bacteria are necessary for the
	hosts to reproduce and develop normally. In facultative symbiosis,
	there are four main altered phenotypes that are possible:
	feminization, parthenogenesis, male-killing, and cytoplasmic
	incompatibility.
Feminization, a process by which geneticly male organisms turn
	into females, characterizes the infections of male organisms by
	Wolbachia, which require females to reproduce and survive. In
	the 1990s, Thierry Rigaud and his collegues at the University of
	Poitiers in Poitiers, France, studied this phenomenon in
	crustaceans. In crustaceans with female heterogamety, males have ZZ
	sexual chromosomes and females have ZW sexual chromosomes, similar to how human males have XY sexual chromosomes and human females XX
	sexual chromosomes. Wolbachia turn genetic males into
	functional females able to reproduce and produce offspring despite
	their genetic sex (ZZ). Wolbachia inhibits the production of
	androgen hormones that are responsible for the development of males'
	sexual characters, making the gonads develop female characters
	instead. Feminization may depend on endocrine-related processes,
	such as hormonal variations.
As Wolbachia do not infect a whole population of hosts,
	some males remain in the population. However, Rigaud and his research team suggested
	that Wolbachia that feminize males can influence the
	evolution of crustaceans by leading to a complete loss of female
	heterogamety. Several populations of the common pill-bug Armadillidium
	vulgare no longer have females with a ZW sex chromosome.
	These females are in fact genetic males, which Wolbachia
	turned into females. Feminization then leads to a sex-ratio of the
	host population that favors females.
The second way that Wolbachia alter their hosts is to cause
	them to reproduce via parthenogenesis. Parthenogenesis is a form of
	reproduction without fertilization in which eggs can grow and develop into embryos and
	eventually into adults. In 1990, Richard Stouthamer
	and his colleagues at the University of Rochester in Rochester, New
	York, studied parthenogenesis in wasps. In some parasitic wasps and
	acari, fertilized eggs contain two pairs of chromosomes (they are
	diploid) and usually develop into females, whereas non-fertilized
	eggs contain only one copy of each chromosome (they are haploid) and
	develop into males. When Wolbachia infect haploid egg cells,
	they double the haploid set of maternal chromosomes in the egg,
	causing the eggs to develop into females. Infected females can
	produce twice as many offspring as the non-infected ones. Thus the bacteria alter how their hosts reproduce and develop so that the bacteria can better spread in their hosts' populations.
The other two phenotypes induced by facultative symbiosis are
	male-killing (death of males), and cytoplasmic incompatibility
	(incompatibility between sperm and egg). In those two processes,
	Wolbachia induce developmental and reproductive variations in
	their hosts. In 1999, Gregory Hurst and his colleagues at the
	University College London in London, UK, showed that male-killing
	Wolbachia infect the ladybug Adalia
	bipunctata and the butterfly Acraea encedon
	and cause the male embryos to die. As the two species have
	different reproductive mechanisms, Hurst and his colleagues
	hypothesized that Wolbachia also evolved different mechanisms
	to recognize a host's sex.
Cytoplasmic incompatibility, as Laven had described in 1967, is an
	incompatibility between sperm and egg, for which Wolbachia is
	responsible. This incompatibility silences the paternal chromosomes
	of infected embryos. In the infected organisms, the infected eggs
	often die. In 1990, Johannes Breeuwer and John Werren of the
	University of Rochester in Rochester, New York, described two kinds
	of cytoplasmic incompatibility: unidirectional and bidirectional. Cytoplasmic incompatibility is often
	unidirectional. When infected males mate  with uninfected females,
	they fail to produce viable offspring, whereas when uninfected males mate with
	infected females, they can produce viable offspring.
	Bi-directional incompatibility occurs when different and incompatible Wolbachia strains infect males and females, and when those infected males and females mate with each other, they fail to produce viable offspring. In all cases,
	cytoplasmic incompatibility results from an abnormal condensation of
	paternal chromosomes in the fertilized egg, which prevent paternal chromosomes from
	contributing to the development of the egg.
Wolbachia infections that cause incompatibility can spread
	rapidly through a population, as infected eggs are compatible with
	both infected and uninfected sperm whereas uninfected eggs are only
	compatible with uninfected sperm. These infections can influence the
	evolution of a population such that all females in the population
	become infected. The processes of infection, especially male-killing,
	can indicate emerging selection pressures at the community-level.
	The populations of infected ladybugs, for example, produce cannibal
	larvae that eat mostly other larvae. There is a strong competition
	for survival between larvae. In this context, dead male larvae
	provide a source of food for the female larvae that eat
	still-born males. This phenomenon decreases the level of
	antagonistic interactions between siblings and favors the
	development of female larvae.
These four phenotypes suggest that external factors like bacteria
	can control the processes of reproduction and development of a host. Host
	populations are manipulated and altered in such a way that
	Wolbachia can be more important than the hosts' genes to the determination and the
	development of sex characteristics. But beside these four
	phenotypes, Wolbachia are also responsible for
	obligatory symbiosis, in which the hosts cannot develop without the bacteria.
In 2001, Frank Dedeine and his colleagues at the University of
	Lyon 1 in Lyon, France, found that without Wolbachia, female
	wasps of the species Asobara tabida
	failed to produce egg cells. Three different strains of
	Wolbachia infected those wasps. Two of them induced
	incompatibility between sperm and eggs, resulting in no progeny,
	whereas one was involved in oogenesis. When Dedeine and his research
	team used antibiotics to kill Wolbachia in the female wasps,
	the wasps failed to produce mature egg cells, and thus could not
	reproduce. The research team hypothesized that this phenomena
	resulted from a long co-evolution between the wasps and
	Wolbachia, in which the hosts have become dependent on
	Wolbachia. Dedeine and his colleagues suggested that the wasp
	species or its ancestors became associated with a strain of the
	bacteria necessary to produce egg cells. This association would have
	led to a functional redundancy of host and symbiotic genes. Because
	there is no need to have two genes with the same function, the
	occurrence of functional redundancy can lead to the loss of function
	of genes in one of the symbiont. In this case, the host itself lost
	the capacity to produce the function, becoming totally dependent on
	Wolbachia for reproduction and development.
In some nematode worms, Wolbachia are also necessary for
	normal development and fertility. Filarial nematodes are parasites
	of the tropics, and are responsible for human diseases like
	onchocerciasis, called river blindness, or elephantiasis,
	characterized by the gross enlargement of body parts. In 2003, Achim Hoerauf and his colleagues at
	the Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-University of Bonn in Bonn, Germany,
	suggested that because elimination of Wolbachia from filarial
	nematodes results in either death or sterility of the nematode, an
	antibiotic treatment to remove the bacteria could control filarial
	nematode diseases. 
 Sources Bouchon, Didier,
		Thierry Rigaud, and Pierre Juchault. "Evidence for widespread
		Wolbachia infection in isopod crustaceans: molecular
		identification and host feminization." Proceedings of the Royal
		Society 265 (1998): 1081–90.
		http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1689171/pdf/9684374.pdf (Accessed November 4, 2014).
Breeuwer, Johannes A. and John
		H. Werren. "Microorganisms associated with chromosome
		destruction and reproductive isolation between two insect
		species." Nature 346 (1990): 558–60.
Dedeine, Frank, Fabrice
		Vavre, Frédéric Fleury, Benjamin Loppin, Michael E. Hochberg,
		and	Michel Boulétreau. "Removing symbiotic Wolbachia bacteria
		specifically inhibits oogenesis in a parasitic wasp."
		Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (2011): 6247–52.
		http://www.pnas.org/content/98/11/6247.full (Accessed
			November 4, 2014).
Hertig, Marshall, and Simeon B. Wolbach.
		"Studies on rickettsia-like microorganisms in 	insects."
		Journal of Medical Research 44 (1924): 329–74.
		http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2041761/pdf/jmedres00003-0073.pdf (Accessed 	November 4, 2014).
Hertig,
		Marshall. "The rickettsia Wolbachia pipientis and associated
		inclusions of the mosquito, Culex pipiens." Parasitology 28
		(1936): 453–86.
Hoerauf, Achim, Sabine Mand, Kerstin Fischer,
		Thomas Kruppa, Yeboah Marfo-Debrekyei, 	Alexander Y. Debrah,
		Kenneth M. Pfarr, Ohene Adjei, and Dietrich W.
		Büttner.	"Doxycycline as a novel strategy against bancroftian
		filariasis-depletion of 	Wolbachia endosymbionts from
		Wuchereria bancrofti and stop of microfilaria 	production."
		Medical Microbiology and Immunolgy 192 (2003): 211–6.
		
Hurst, Gregory D.D., Francis M. Jiggins,
		J. Hinrich Graf Von Der Schulenburg, Dominique Bertrand, Stuart
		A. West, Irina I. Goriacheva, Ilia A. Zakharov, John H. Werren,
		Richard Stouthamer, and Michael E. N. Majerus. "Male-killing
		Wolbachia in two species of insect." Proceedings of the Royal
		Society (1999) 266: 735–40.
		http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1689827/ (Accessed January 27, 2015).
Laven, Hannes. "Speciation in Mosquitos: Speciation by Cytoplasmic Isolation in the Culex Pipiens-Complex." Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 24 (1959): 166–173. 
Rigaud, Thierry "Inherited microorganisms
		and sex determination of arthropod hosts." In Scott L. O'Neill, John H. Werren, and Ary A.
		Hoffmann (eds.) Influential
		Passengers.	Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997: 81–101.
Stouthamer, Richard, Robert F. Luck, and Wiliam D. Hamilton.
		"Antibiotics cause 	parthenogenetic trichogramms to revert to
		sex." Proceedings of the National Academy 	of Sciences
		(1990): 2424–27.
		http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC53701/ (Accessed 	November 4, 2014).
Stouthamer, Richard, and
		David J. Kazmer "Cytogenetic of microbe associated
		parthenogenesis, consequences for gene flow in  Trichogramma
		wasps." Heredity 73 (1994): 317–27.
		http://www.nature.com/hdy/journal/v73/n3/pdf/hdy1994139a.pdf
		(Accessed 	November 4, 2014).
Werren, John H., Wan Zhang, and
		Li R. Guo. "Evolution and phylogeny of Wolbachia: reproductive parasites of arthropods." Proceedings of the
		Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 261 (1995): 55–63.
		http://www.jstor.org/stable/50047 (Accessed January 27, 2015).
Yen, Janice, and A. Ralph Barr. "New hypothesis of the
		cause of cytoplasmic incompatibility in Culex Pipiens." Nature
		(1971): 65–78.  

How to cite
Prevot, Karine, "Wolbachia". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2015-01-29). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8285.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Thursday, March 19, 2015 - 18:33
 Topic
Subject
 Wolbachia; Bacteria; Host-bacteria relationships; Host-parasite relationships; Host-parasite relationships; arthropods; nematodes; Reproduction; microorganisms; Rickettsiaceae; Organism