By Divyash Chhetri
Published: 2014-06-11
Keywords: one gene-one enzyme, George Beadle, Edward Tatum, Neurospora, molecular biology
 "Genetic Control of Biochemical Reactions in Neurospora" (1941), by George W. Beadle and Edward L. TatumGeorge Wells Beadle and Edward Lawrie Tatum's 1941
	article "Genetic Control of Biochemical Reactions in
	Neurospora" detailed their experiments on how genes regulated
	chemical reactions, and how the chemical reactions in turn affected
	development in the organism. Beadle and Tatum experimented on
	Neurospora, a type of bread mold, and they concluded that mutations
	to genes affected the enzymes of organisms, a result that biologists
	later generalized to proteins, not just enzymes. Beadle and
	Tatum's experiments provided an early link between genetics and the
	field of molecular biology.
 Beadle and Tatum conducted the
	experiments on Neurospora while working at Stanford University, in
	Stanford, California. Beadle arrived at Stanford in 1937 after
	leaving a position at Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachussetts. He remained at
	Stanford for nine years. Beadle first studied the fruit flies Drosophila. He focused on
	eye color, hoping to show how genes controlled  metabolic
	reactions in a cell. He soon realized that Drosophila was not the
	best organism for his research purposes. At that time, he worked with
	Tatum, who had arrived at Stanford in 1937 as a research associate.
	The two scientists, after dropping the Drosophila experiments,
	decided to work with Neurospora instead.
 Prior to Beadle and Tatum's
	experiments, scientists had established that many biochemical
	reactions were affected and controlled by specific genes by studying 
	the biochemical basis of traits in anthocyanin, which are vacuolar
	pigments in plants, and by studying organisms such as yeast. Beadle and Tatum
	argued that those approaches were limited to studying non-heritable
	characters, as well as visible traits. Beadle and Tatum sought to
	identify characters that were easier to analyze. 
The organism
	Neurospora was suited for the type of study that Beadle and Tatum
	conducted. The scientists bombarded the spores with X-rays to cause
	mutations in their genes. If these mutated organisms were placed in
	a medium lacking essential nutrients, most of them died because of
	their inability to complete the necessary chemical reactions to survive.
	However, some mutants survived, and they grew when placed in a
	medium with the necessary nutrients, so Beadle and Tatum could study
	them. Neurospora can use sucrose as a source for carbon, and
	they can use it to complete the appropriate reactions to survive. By inducing a
	mutation in the gene responsible for the hydrolysis of sucrose, the
	organism would then no longer be able to survive in a medium
	containing sucrose. However, there was the possibility that the
	mutated strain could still grow in a different medium, like glucose
	for example.
 Beadle and Tatum then placed the Neurospora in two
	media to compare how spores differently synthesizing products across media.
	One was a medium that Beadle and Tatum called complete, meaning it already contained
	many of the components that the spores could normally synthesize.
	This medium consisted of agar, inorganic salts, malt extract, yeast
	extract, and glucose. After the mutants were placed in the complete
	medium, they were transferred to the minimal medium, for which the
	organism was required to synthesize the necessary products on its
	own. The minimal medium was composed of inorganic salts,
	disaccharides, fats, and other complex carbon sources, as well as
	biotin, the single growth factor that normal Neurospora cannot
	synthesize. Growth factors are substances that stimulate cell growth
	and differentiation. Mutant strains of Neurospora that grew in the
	first medium but not the second couldn't synthesize the
	essential products. Beadle and Tatum then systematically examined
	these strains to identify what substance or substances the spores couldn't synthesize. 
Beadle and Tatum found that three mutants grew
	normally on the complete medium, but did not grow in the minimal
	medium. One strain failed to produce vitamin B6, and the other two
	strains failed to synthesize vitamin B1 and para-aminobenzoic acid.
	From this result, Beadle and Tatum concluded that these substances
	were necessary growth factors for Neurospora. Additionally, they
	concluded that the inability of a mutant to produce vitamin B6, such
	a mutant is called a pyridoxinless mutant, was differentiated by a
	single gene, which they had mutated in spores via X-rays.
 In 1945,
	Beadle published a more comprehensive account of the theories
	presented in the 1941 paper, titled "Genetics and Metabolism in
	Neurospora." The experiments on Neurospora allowed Beadle and Tatum
	to propose the one gene-one enzyme hypothesis, a theory that became
	central to genetics. The Neurospora experiments of the early 1940's
	laid the foundation for Beadle and Tatum's later Nobel Prize in
	Physiology or Medicine, awarded in 1958. 
 Sources Beadle, George
		Wells. "Genetics and Metabolism in Neurospora." Physiological
		Reviews 25 (1945): 643–63.
Beadle, George Wells, and Edward L. Tatum. "Genetic Control of
Biochemical Reactions in Neurospora." National Academy of Sciences 27
(1941): 499–505.  http://www.pnas.org/content/27/11/499.full.pdf
(Accessed April 8, 2014).
Beadle, George Wells, and Edward L. Tatum. "Neurospora. II. Methods of
Producing and Detecting Mutations Concerned with Nutritional
Requirements." American Journal of Botany 32 (1945): 678–86.
"George Beadle - Biographical". Nobelprize.org. Nobel Media AB 2013.
Web. 11 Apr 2014.
 http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates/1958/beadle-
bio.html (Accessed April 17, 2014).
Houlahan, Mary B., George. W. Beadle, and Hermione Grant Calhoun.
"Linkage Studies with Biochemical Mutants of Neurospora crassa."
Genetics 34 (1949): 493–507.
 http://www.genetics.org/content/34/5/493.full.pdf+html (Accessed April
17, 2014).  

How to cite
Chhetri, Divyash, ""Genetic Control of Biochemical Reactions in Neurospora" (1941), by George W. Beadle and Edward L. Tatum". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-06-11). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/7900.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Thursday, June 12, 2014 - 16:39
 Topic
Subject
Genetics; Genes; Experiment