By Alexis Abboud
Published: 2014-11-14
Keywords: fetal cells, Kiarash Khosrotehrani
 "Transfer of Fetal Cells with Multilineage Potential to Maternal Tissue" (2004), by Kiarash Khosrotehrani et al.In 2004, a team of researchers at Tufts-New England
	Medical Center in Boston, Massachusetts, investigated the fetal
	cells that remained in the maternal blood stream after pregnancy.
	The results were published in "Transfer of Fetal Cells with
	Multilineage Potential to Maternal Tissue." The team working on that
	research included Kiarash Khosrotehrani, Kirby L. Johnson, Dong
	Hyun Cha, Robert N. Salomon, and Diana W. Bianchi. The researchers
	reported that the fetal cells passed to a pregnant woman during
	pregnancy could develop into multiple cell types in her organs. They
	studied these differentiated fetal cells in a cohort of women
	fighting different diseases. The researchers found that the fetal
	cells in the women differentiated into different cell types under
	the influence of maternal tissues, and that those differentiated
	cells concentrated in the tissue surrounding diseased tissues.
	According to the team, this response could be a therapeutic response
	to the disease in the once pregnant woman. The research indicated the long
	lasting effects of pregnancy in a woman's body.
In 1990, Bianchi published "Isolation of fetal DNA from nucleated
	erythrocytes in maternal blood," reporting the detection of intact
	fetal cells in the blood of women who had been pregnant. Those cells
	had been passed to the woman during pregnancy, through the
	placenta. Some considered the discovery an early step toward the
	development of non-invasive prenatal genetic tests, in which doctors
	could draw blood from a pregnant woman and isolate the fetal cells
	within it. Those cells could then be genetically sequenced to
	determine genetic and chromosomal abnormalities of the fetus,
	without any intervention on the fetus or the womb. However, the
	small number of intact fetal cells found within the maternal blood
	sample limited this technique. Within a single maternal blood
	sample, doctors could retrieve only 0.1 to 1 ng of intact fetal
	cells. A nanogram (ng) is one billionth of a gram, and a sample of
	only 1 ng left researchers little genetic material for analysis.
	Researchers largely abandoned the use of intact fetal cells as a
	method of non-invasive prenatal genetic analysis.
Researchers continued to study the fetal cells found within
	maternal blood for other reasons. In their experiment,
	Khosrotehrani, Johnson, Cha, Salomon, and Bianchi hypothesized that
	fetal cells, transferred to maternal blood during pregnancy, could
	develop into multiple cell types within the woman's body. Due to
	Bianchi's earlier work in detecting these intact fetal cells in
	maternal blood, the team knew that a detectable amount of fetal
	cells were transferred to the pregnant woman during pregnancy. The 2004
	experiment was designed to determine what happened to these fetal
	cells after pregnancy. Khosrotehrani was a postdoctoral student,
	while Johnson, Cha, Salomon, and Bianchi were researchers or
	professors at Tufts.
In 2004, Khosrotehrani and his team looked for what they
	called microchimeric fetal cells in different maternal tissue samples.
	Chimeras are organisms in which some of the cells have one set of DNA, and others have a different set. Fetal cells
	are present in the maternal blood stream after any length of
	gestation, meaning that even if a fetus is aborted, fetal cells will
	still be in a woman's bloodstream. This experiment referred to those
	remaining cells as microchimeric fetal cells because the woman
	contains two different cell lines: that of her own cells, as well as
	that of the fetal cells. The transferred fetal cells are often
	specialized fetal progenitor cells. These cells are hematopoietic
	stem cells, meaning that they are fetal cells that can
	differentiate to become many different types of blood cells in a
	fetus. In this study, Khosrotehrani and his team sought to identify
	fetal cells that had differentiated in the woman's body under the
	influence of maternal cells.
Khosrotehrani's team analyzed maternal tissue samples from ten
	women fighting diseases such as cancer and autoimmune diseases. They
	chose those ten women for two reasons. The first was that the women
	had high numbers of fetal cells in their blood stream. Although
	fetal cells are transferred to women during pregnancy, the
	number of cells transferred varies. Those women had higher than
	average levels of fetal cells. The experimenters
	acknowledged that these numbers biased their results in some way.
	The second reason those women were selected was because they had all
	carried male fetuses, and the researchers could more easily detect
	the fetal cells of males in a female body, as male cells are chromosomally
	different from the maternal cells. Female fetal cells were
	harder to detect. As a control, Khosrotehrani's team also examined
	tissue samples from eleven women with no history of male pregnancy
	and that were not fighting diseases.
The research team first analyzed the tissues using fluorescence
	in situ hybridization (FISH), a technique to detect certain
	strains of DNA. In this case, FISH was used to detect a DNA sequence
	carried only on the Y chromosome, a strain that would not appear in
	any maternal cells, as maternal cells do not have a Y chromosome and
	cannot manifest this DNA sequence. The researchers then used
	immunolabeling, a technique using antigens and the matching
	antibodies to detect the presence of specific kinds of cells, to
	determine the cell type of these fetal cells. They knew that the
	fetal cells transferred to the woman all started as fetal cells
	that could differentiate into multiple blood cell types, and they
	sought to see if these cells had remained undifferentiated or if they had
	developed into different cell types.
In the ten maternal tissue samples they studied, the researchers
	found seven hundred and one male fetal cells. These fetal cells
	showed cell differentiation based on the tissues in which they were
	found. In the eleven control samples, with no histories of male
	pregnancy, the team found no male cells. Additionally, all of those
	cells had differentiated into different blood cell types. However,
	the cells took on the characteristics of different cells based on
	the maternal environment. For example, in a woman fighting liver
	cancer, the fetal cells found near the liver had some
	characteristics of liver cells.  Moreover, differentiated fetal
	cells concentrated around the sites of maternal disease. In the case
	of a woman with liver cancer, there were high concentrations of
	fetal cells in the tissue surrounding the liver, but not in the
	diseased tissue of the liver itself. The differentiated fetal cells
	were just on the exterior of the woman's diseased tissue.
Khosrotehrani's team's results confirmed the hypothesis that
	intact fetal cells acquired during pregnancy can differentiate into
	multiple cell types in different maternal tissue types. The study
	called this population of fetal cells as pregnancy-associated
	progenitor cells. The fetal cells transferred to the maternal blood
	stream during pregnancy differentiated into different blood cell
	types, but depending on the cell's environment, they have the
	characteristics of other cell types.  The study also showed that
	there were high concentrations of these cells in the tissue
	surrounding maternal disease. The researchers theorized that this
	concentration may be an immunological or therapeutic response by the
	fetal cells in response to the maternal disease. 
 Sources Bianchi, Diana
		W., Alan F. Flint, Mary Frances Pizzimenti, Joan H. Knoll, and
		Samuel A. Latt. "Isolation of fetal DNA from Nucleated
		erythrocytes in maternal blood." Proceedings of the National
		Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 87 (1990):
		3279–83. http://www.pnas.org/content/87/9/3279.full.pdf (Accessed November 11, 2014). 
Bianchi, Diana W., Gretchen K. Zickwolf, Gary J. Weil,
		Steven S. Sylvester, and MaryAnn DeMaria. "Male fetal progenitor
		cells persist in maternal blood for as long as 27 years post
		partum." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
		United States of America 93 (1996): 705–8. http://www.pnas.org/content/93/2/705.full.pdf (Accessed November 11, 2014).
Khosrotehrani,
		Kiarash, Kirby L. Johnson, Dong Hyun Cha, Robert N. Salomon, and
		Diana W. Bianchi. "Transfer of Fetal Cells with Multilineage
		Potential to Maternal Tissue." Journal of American Medical
		Association 292 (2004): 75–80. http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=199045 (Accessed November 11, 2014).
Wright, Caroline F. and Hilary
		Burton. "The use of cell-free fetal nucleic acids in maternal
		blood for non-invasive prenatal diagnosis." Human Reproduction
		Update 15 (2009): 139–51. http://humupd.oxfordjournals.org/content/15/1/139.long (Accessed November 11, 2014).  

How to cite
Abboud, Alexis, ""Transfer of Fetal Cells with Multilineage Potential to Maternal Tissue" (2004), by Kiarash Khosrotehrani et al.". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-11-14). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8238.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Saturday, November 15, 2014 - 00:18
 Topic
Subject
 Cells; Stem cells; Bianchi, Diana W.; Maternal-fetal exchange; Fetal cells from maternal blood; Fetus; Placenta; Pregnancy; Immune response; Immunity; Tufts-New England Medical Center; Fluorescence in situ hybridization; Experiment