By EP Editorial Team
Published: 2008-10-24
Keywords: Biography, History, Philosophy
 Jane Maienschein

Jane Maienschein is the daughter of 
			Joyce Kylander and 
			Fred Maienschein, and was born in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, on 23 September 1950.  She attended MIT as a freshman and then transferred to 
			Yale University in 1969 when Yale decided to admit women undergraduates.  In 1972 she graduated with an honors degree in History, the Arts, and Letters having written a thesis on the history of science.  She then attended 
			Indiana University and studied with historian of embryology
Frederick B. Churchill, took courses with embryologist 
			Rudolf Raff, and learned how to do embryological laboratory research with 
			Robert Briggs.  She received her MA in 1976 and a PhD in 1978, with a pre-doctoral Fellowship at the Smithsonian to study the history of microscopes and microscopy, and an NSF-funded dissertation improvement visit to the 
			Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) to reproduce old embryological experiments and soak up the history and resources of the 
			MBL Library and labs.  Maienschein’s scholarly research focuses on the history and philosophy of developmental biology.
In graduate school 
			Briggs helped Maienschein reproduce historical experiments using the dissertation study of 
			Ross Granville Harrison’s 1907 experiments on nerve fiber development.  
			Harrison had asked whether the neuroblast cell (which we would now call a neural stem cell) can reach out and develop its fiber by protoplasmic outgrowth or whether the cell required a pre-established bridge, as many of his contemporaries argued must be the case.  
			Harrison carried out the first ever tissue culture experiment, in which he got the neuroblast cells to grow when transplanted into an artificial medium of frog lymph.  
			Briggs and Maienschein discovered that carrying out the experiment with the techniques 
			Harrison described led to lots of nice bacterial and other unidentified cultures, but not nerve cells.  Retracing 
			Harrison’s steps revealed that he had taken advantage of being temporarily housed near the bacteriologists at 
			Yale University and had used more sophisticated aseptic techniques than he described.  
This work led Maienschein to an analysis of the role of the details of scientific practices and the value of carrying out “practical history,” as Edwin Clarke called it.  She has also asked questions about the role of experiments in settling (or failing to settle) issues of theoretical debate.  Her work in history of embryology has concentrated especially on the late nineteenth and into the twentieth century, including work done at the 
			Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, and on issues of 
			morphogenesis and differentiation related to cell division.  This research has led her to study stem cell research and regenerative medicine.  
Maienschein is also a dedicated teacher who has received multiple awards, including the Arizona State University Parents Association Professor of the Year Chair, Regents’ Professorship, and President’s Professorship. In addition, she received the History of Science Society’s Joseph H. Hazen Education Prize Award.  During the 105th United States Congressional session, in 1997 and 1998, she served as senior science advisor to Congressman Matt Salmon, who served on the Science Committee. She took a group of undergraduates to Washington, which led to their paper presentation at the 150th meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, and that led to an invitation to write an editorial for Science.  The students’ essay on “Scientific Literacy” remains the only publication in Science by undergraduates, and it led to a longer peer-reviewed article in Science Communication.  
This personal exposure to the political context of science also led Maienschein to research reflecting more seriously on the social, political, and legal contexts of scientific research.  Most productively, this has resulted in collaborative publications and projects with bioethicist 
			Jason Scott Robert and 
			Rachel Ankeny.  
Maienschein served as the first president for the 
			International Society for History, Philosophy, and Social Studies of Biology (“Ishkabibble”) in 1989–1991, president of the 
			History of Science Society in 2008 and 2009, and in numerous other administrative rolls. She is Director of the 
			Embryo Project, along with 
			Manfred Laubichler. 

Sources
Arizona State University.  http://www.public.asu.edu/~atjvm/ (Accessed October 24, 2008).
Arizona State University Libraries. http://knet.asu.edu/research/?getObject=asulib:41285 (Accessed October 24, 2008).
School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University.  http://sols.asu.edu/people/faculty/jmaienschein.php (Accessed October 24, 2008).


How to cite
Editorial Team, EP, "Jane Maienschein (1950- )". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2008-10-24). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/1948.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
© Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Wednesday, March 18, 2015 - 23:43
 Topic
Subject
 Maienschein, Jane; People