By Kimberly A. Buettner
Published: 2007-11-01
Keywords: Biography, Education, Carnegie Institution of Washington
 Franklin Paine MallFranklin Paine Mall was born into a farming family in Belle Plaine, Iowa, on 28 September 1862.  While he attended a local academy, an influential teacher fueled Mall’s interest in science.  From 1880–1883, he studied medicine at the 
		University of Michigan, attaining his MD degree in 1883.  William J. Mayo, who later became a famous surgeon and co-founder of the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, was a classmate of Mall’s.  Throughout his studies at 
		Michigan, he was influenced by Corydon L. Ford, a professor of anatomy, Victor C. Vaughn, a biochemist and bacteriologist, and Henry Sewall, a physiologist.
After completing his degree, Mall moved to Heidelberg to study ophthalmology.  However, in 1884, he moved to Leipzig to follow his growing interest in research.  In Leipzig he became a student of embryologist 
		Wilhelm His and met William H. Welch, future dean of 
		Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.  Under His, Mall completed a study of the thymus that contradicted His’s earlier work.  He also helped with the development of a collection of human embryos.  After the completion of his thymus study and on the advice of 
		His, Mall moved to physiologist 
		Carl Ludwig’s lab.  There Mall studied the structure of the small intestine.
In 1886 Mall left for America and applied for a fellowship in the department of pathology at the 
		Johns Hopkins Hospital.  Mall, in collaboration with 
		William S. Halsted, continued his study of the intestines and also the anatomy and physiology of the stomach.  Mall also studied the microscopic structure of connective tissue, which led his research partner 
		Halsted to develop a surgical suturing method for the intestine.
In 1889 Mall was offered an adjunct professorship of anatomy at 
		Clark University in Worchester, Massachusetts.  At 
		Clark, Mall used the Born 
		wax-plate method to construct a model of an early 
		human embryo, the first in the United States.  He also developed an embryological research program.  In 1892 Mall left for a professor of anatomy position at the school of medicine at the 
		University of Chicago.
With the opening of the 
		Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine in 1893, William Welch appointed Mall head of the department of anatomy.  At 
		Johns Hopkins Mall’s research focused at first on the gross structure of the spleen and liver.  He worked with a number of researchers, including 
		Ross G. Harrison, 
		Florence R. Sabin, 
		George L. Streeter, 
		Warren H. Lewis, and 
		Herbert M. Evans.  Mall also began to reform the teaching of anatomy in the United States and was able to do so because of the limited restraints at 
		Johns Hopkins.  His teaching included fewer lectures and more opportunities for students to learn for themselves through dissections, research, and advice from instructors.  The “learning by doing” teaching methods developed by Mall and others at 
		Johns Hopkins were implemented at a number of universities.  While at 
		Johns Hopkins, Mall continued to collect human embryos, which led to research on the development of the intestines, body cavities, the diaphragm, and the abdominal walls.
In 1894 Mall married Mabel Glover, who was one of three female students in Mall’s first class at 
		Johns Hopkins.  The Malls later had two daughters.  In 1900 he co-founded the American Journal of Anatomy with 
		Charles S. Minot of 
		Harvard
 and 
		George S. Huntington of Columbia University.  He served from 1906–1908 as president of the American Association of Anatomists.  From 1910–1912 Mall edited two volumes of the Handbook of Human Embryology with 
		Franz Keibel and contributed three chapters.  Mall also edited the first six volumes of the 
		Carnegie Institution of Washington’s Department of Embryology’s Contributions to Embryology.
In 1913 Mall had appealed to the Carnegie Institution to create a department of embryology that would be housed at 
		Johns Hopkins.  He received a $15,000 grant that established the department, which Mall chaired until his death in 1917.  Mall’s small 
		collection of human embryos grew rapidly so that by 1916 over 500 persons had contributed the hundreds of specimens.  Even the State Board of Public Health for Maryland helped by instructing physicians to send any specimens to the collection.  Mall gave his own embryo collection to the department and led the lab until his death in Baltimore, Maryland, on 17 November 1917.  The collection serves as a permanent tribute to Mall’s contributions in embryology.

Sources
Corner, George W.  “Mall, Franklin Paine.” Dictionary of Scientific Biography 9: 55–58.
Maienschein, Jane, Marie Glitz, and Garland E. Allen, eds.  Centennial History of the Carnegie Institute of Washington, Volume V.  The Department of Embryology, especially chapters 1–2.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.


How to cite
Buettner, Kimberly A., "Franklin Paine Mall (1862-1917)". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2007-11-01). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/1682.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
© Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Wednesday, March 18, 2015 - 17:14
 Topic
Subject
 Mall, Franklin P. (Franklin Paine), 1862-1917; People