By Cera R. Lawrence
Published: 2008-08-13
Keywords: Preformationism, Ova, Sperm
 OvismOvism was one of two models of 
		preformationism, a theory of generation prevalent in the late seventeenth through the end of the eighteenth century. Contrary to the competing theory of 
		epigenesis (gradual emergence of form), preformationism held that the unborn offspring existed fully formed in the 
		eggs or 
		sperm of its parents prior to conception. The ovist model held that the maternal 
		egg was the location of this preformed 
		embryo, while the other 
		preformationism model known as 
		spermism preferred the 
		paternal germ cell, as the name implies.
The beginnings of ovism are found in the work of 
		William Harvey, the sixteenth century anatomist who discovered circulation. While Harvey himself adhered to the theory of 
		epigenesis, the research he performed on 
		eggs in other animals convinced him that all animals involve 
		eggs at some point in their reproductive cycle. He coined the Latin phrase ex ovo omnia (“from the egg, all”) to describe this idea, and his work influenced future scientists to place more importance on the maternal contribution to generation than the paternal. 
However, Harvey’s work did not establish that offspring are present in the maternal egg prior to fertilization, or that the adult structure exists fully formed rather than emerging gradually. These two principles, central to the theory of ovism, were first established by 
		Marcello Malpighi and 
		Jan Swammerdam.  
		Malpighi worked with 
		chicken eggs at early stages of incubation, and observed under the 
		microscope well-formed organs and structures that already resembled the 
		chick they would become.  
		Swammerdam did extensive research with 
		metamorphic insects. He treated late-stage larvae of 
		silkworms in a boiling vinegar solution, and then discovered upon dissection that the structure of wings, legs, and other parts of the adult silk moth were clearly visible, as though the adult form were simply contained within the larval form. This demonstration, reported by observers from the time to be very dramatic, convinced many scientists that form did not organize itself gradually, is it would under 
		epigenesis.
The ovist model was further supported by the discovery of 
		parthenogenesis by 
		Charles Bonnet (published in 
		Traite d’insectologie, 1744) and by the work of ovism’s greatest champion, 
		Albrecht von Haller. Observing that female animals as complex as salamanders give birth to young without ever needing to be fertilized by a male, 
		Bonnet concluded that the offspring must necessarily exist totally within the 
		egg of the mother. He hypothesized that the task of the seminal fluid was to open the egg, spurring it to start growing. In 
		parthenogenetic animals, he wrote, the mother provided this fluid to herself. 
		Bonnet’s contemporary 
		Haller examined young 
		chicken embryos under the microscope and formulated the 
		“membrane continuity proof” of 
		preformationism. Noting that the 
		yolk appeared to be attached to the embryonic 
		chick’s small intestine, Haller pointed out that the embryo must be created at the same time as the yolk, and that since unfertilized eggs also have yolks, the embryo must exist there prior to fertilization. 
One of the last supporters of ovism was 
		Lazzaro Spallanzani.  In the 1780s 
		Spallanzani conducted experiments with unfertilized 
		frog eggs and progressively more filtered frog semen. To those who read them now, many of 
		Spallanzani’s experiments point clearly to the information that 
		spermatazoa are necessary for fertilization, but he never drew this conclusion himself, instead becoming further convinced that the 
		egg contained a fully-formed tadpole that only needed to be fertilized with 
		seminal fluid to begin the process of unfolding. Indeed, when he discusses this work in his 
		Experiences pour Servir a L’Histoire des Animaux et des Plantes, he uses the words tadpole and egg almost interchangeably. 
Ovism saw its heyday in the middle to late eighteenth century, but by the turn of the nineteenth century, it had fallen out of fashion. However, the work done by ovist naturalists promoted the study of the 
		egg and thus greatly increased the understanding of the process of embryonic development.


Sources
Burns, Williams. Science in the Enlightenment: An Encyclopedia. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO, 2003.
Gabriel, Mordecai L., and Seymour Fodel, eds. Great Experiments in Biology. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1955.
Needham, Joseph. History of Embryology. New York: Abelard-Schuman, 1959. 
Pinto-Correia, Clara. The Ovary of Eve. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997.
Roe, Shirley. Matter, Life, and Generation: Eighteenth Century Embryology and the Haller-Wolff Debate. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981.


How to cite
Lawrence, Cera R., "Ovism". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2008-08-13). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/1801.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
© Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Wednesday, September 25, 2013 - 15:53
 Topic
Subject
Ovum;  Concept