By Shawn A. Miller
Published: 2014-06-11
Keywords: Gene Expression, EMAP, EMAGE, Duncan Davidson, Richard Baldock
 The e-Mouse Atlas Project (1992- )The Edinburgh Mouse Atlas, also called the e-Mouse Atlas
	Project (EMAP), is an online resource comprised of the e-Mouse Atlas
	(EMA), a detailed digital model of mouse development, and the
	e-Mouse Atlas of Gene Expression (EMAGE), a database that identifies
	sites of gene expression in mouse embryos. Duncan Davidson and
	Richard Baldock founded the project in 1992, and the Medical
	Research Council (MRC) in Edinburgh, United Kingdom, funds the
	project. Davidson and Baldock announced the project in an article
	titled "A Real Mouse for Your Computer," citing the need to manage
	and analyze the volume of data that overwhelmed developmental biologists. Though EMAP resources were distributed via CD-ROM in the
	early years, the project moved increasingly online by the early
	2000s. Into the early decades of the twenty-first century, it was in active development. EMAP can be
	utilized as a developmental biology teaching resource and as a
	research tool that enables scientists to explore annotated 3D
	virtual mouse embryos. EMAP's goal is to illuminate the molecular
	basis of tissue differentiation.
 The project founders,
	Baldock and Davidson, both studied bioinformatics. In the 1990s,
	they began to argue that developmental biologists faced a
	data-management problem similar to the one that molecular biologists
	grappled with in curating DNA sequence data. Davidson pursued
	bioinformatics to study the representation of the dynamics of gene
	expression, cell lineage, morphogenesis, and differentiation. Baldock
	received a PhD in Theoretical Physics in 1980, when at the
	Australian National University in Canberra, Australia, and he then completed
	a postdoc at the University of Oxford, in Oxford, England, before
	specializing in biomedical imaging. Davidson and Baldock argued that
	information should be stored digitally because of the ubiquity and
	relatively low cost of hard disk drive storage devices, which are
	relatively easy to copy, a feature that helped researchers share information. The move
	to digitize gene expression patterns was also a response to what
	Davidson and Baldock identified as the problem with the standard
	methods of publication, wherein much of the raw data on which
	published results were based were infrequently made available except
	in summary form. Embryo images are also often photographed in
	non-standardized ways by different laboratories. 
 In 1991,
	The Ciba Symposium called "Postimplantation Development in the Mouse"
	first met to address these challenges. Jeremy Green, who
	specialized in molecular signals at King's College London, in London, England, and Peter Rigby, a molecular
	biologist trained at the University of Cambridge, in Cambridge,
	England, and at Stanford University, in Stanford, California,
	organized the symposium. Both organizers were part of the UK's National
	Institute for Medical Research (MRC), headquartered in London, England. During the
	symposium, scientists agreed on a pilot project based on the 9-day
	mouse embryo. According to Matthew Kaufman, author of 1992's Atlas
	of Mouse Development, mice were a suitable subject
	because they had been widely used by developmental biologists
	researching molecular mechanisms responsible for mammalian
	development and differentiation.
 The scientists at the
	symposium determined three requirements for the pilot project.
	First, they sought to digitally represent mouse anatomy at the
	level of tissues. Next, they aimed to store molecular expression
	data that typically does not comport with anatomical structures.
	Lastly, they expected to create an interface for users to interact
	with the database. In the 1990s, researchers developed these technologies
	at the MRC Human Genetics Unit, Western General Hospital, in
	Edinburgh, UK, where both Davidson and Baldock, who had attended the
	Ciba Symposium, held appointments in biomedical systems analysis.

	By 1994, EMAP expanded its institutional relationships beyond MRC to
	involve the University of Edinburgh, in Edinburgh, UK. Baldock held
	an honorary professorship at the University of Edinburgh. In
	1999, EMAP expanded again, with the help of another honorary
	professor at the University of Edinburgh, computational biologist
	Martin Ringwald. Ringwald worked at Jackson Laboratory, an
	independent, nonprofit organization in the US studying mammalian genetics. The Jackson
	Laboratory had been developing the Gene Expression Database (GXD),
	which stores and integrates textual gene expression data of various
	kinds, emphasizing in particular endogenous gene expression during
	mouse development. The collaboration with the Jackson Laboratory
	resulted in incorporating EMAP database nomenclature into the
	GXD.
Portions of EMAP were originally designed as
	object-oriented databases, but researchers later converted those portions to a relational
	architectures to accommodate the data format standards set in
	the "Minimum Information Specification For In Situ Hybridization and
	Immunohistochemistry Experiments (MISFISHIE)," which the Microarray
	Gene Expression Data Society set in 2008. This document enacted
	guidelines and standards that governed the format of visual data
	produced in experiments investigating gene expression in tissue.
	Davidson and Baldock argued that standardizing and structuring forms
	of data in developmental biology is necessary for the online
	resources because those standards create a common language that facilitates the
	sharing of results. Also to facilitate research and communication, researchers licensed
	all content of EMAP under a Creative Commons Attributed
	3.0 License and is thus an Open Access resource.
The EMA
	portion of EMAP provides 3D volumetric models, which detail the
	gross anatomy, shape, and detailed tissue structures of mouse
	embryos. For standardization, EMA uses Theiler Stages,
	which divide the mouse development process into 26 prenatal and 2 postnatal
	stages. Karl Theiler's 1972 The House of Mouse: Atlas of
	Embryonic Development provides the basis for those stages, which became
	the standard stages among mouse researchers. Theiler had received his PhD in
	1945 from the University of Zurich, in Zurich, Switzerland. He then
	researched at both Columbia University New York, in New York, and
	the Jackson Laboratory from 1953 to 1954 before returning to the
	University of Zurich as a professor of anatomy. Theiler Stages were
	too broad to distinguish certain important phases of early
	embryological development. Therefore, EMAP researchers supplemented Theiler's descriptions
	with information such as cell number, somite number, or other
	characteristics. Karen Downs, a professor at the University of Wisconsin, in Madison, Wisconsin, and
	Timothy Davies, a researcher at the University of Oxford, detailed
	this method in a 1993 article titled "Staging of Gastrulating Mouse
	Embryos by Morphological Landmarks in the Dissecting
	Microscope."
 The EMAP anatomy ontology consists of a
	controlled vocabulary of terms that detail, in text form, the names
	and structural relationships among parts of a developing mouse, from
	fertilization of an egg through birth of a pup. In EMA, researchers
	can map a term from the ontology onto images of embryos at various stages of
	development. To do so, they label locations
	deemed significant on mouse embryo images, similar to the way a road
	atlas labels areas of interest on a map, such as cities, state
	parks, major highways, and so forth.
EMAGE, the second
	component of EMAP, consists of two elements. The first is a database
	of gene expression data for mouse embryos. The second is a suite of
	digital tools that enable researchers to query and analyze the
	database, which a staff curates. The database is populated by
	scientific research on mouse embryology from numerous sources.
	Curators select data from academic journals with which EMAP has
	legal agreements or Creative Commons licensing arrangements. The GXD
	curating staff also identifies, compiles, and annotates mouse gene
	expression data from hundreds of journals, and they collect that data in the
	Gene Expression Literature Index. Additional data comes from
	individual research laboratories and large-scale gene expression
	screening projects such as the European Union-funded EURExpress and
	FaceBase, which provides 3D images of craniofacial development.
	FaceBase is run by Mike Dixon at the University of Manchester, in
	Manchester, England, along with David FitzPatrick at the MRC Human Genetics
	Unit.
EMAGE describes gene expression patterns using textual
	annotation and spatial annotation tools. Curators annotate the EMAP
	anatomy ontology to indicate sites of gene expression, based on key
	words in journal articles. For instance, if a journal article
	describes the development of the cardiovascular system, curators can
	translate the textual description in the article into terms of the
	EMAP controlled vocabulary, which has associated four digit numbers,
	and which enables researchers to organize their annotations in hierarchies.
	Database entries for such an article might include labeling areas
	responsible for the development of, in order of increasing
	specificity: 

<!--/*--><![CDATA[/* ><!--*/
.speciallist, .speciallist ul {
list-style-type: none;
} 
/*--><!]]>*/

organ system (EMAP:2220)
        
            cardiovascular system (EMAP:2388)
 
            arterial system (EMAP:2389)
 
                branchial arch artery (EMAP:2390)
 
                    1st arch artery (EMAP:2391)
2nd arch artery (EMAP:2392)
3rd arch artery (EMAP:2393)
 
                            4th arch artery (EMAP:2394)
6th arch artery (EMAP:2395)





Often the terms used in an article will correspond to the EMAP
ontology, but not always.
To spatially annotate images of developing mice, researchers use data from the
	e-Mouse Atlas as a spatial framework, in which standard images indicate where in normal mouse embryos genes make proteins or other products. Unlike a natural language, which must conform to certain
	syntactic structures, data in images are subject to no such
	constraints. Spatial annotation takes this unstructured data and
	maps it onto a spatially standardized description to be stored in a
	database. The e-Mouse Atlas thus functions as a tool that helps
	identify and name parts of the embryo. EMAGE uses a bespoke program
	called MAPaint for spatial annotation. EMAGE also stores spatially
	mapped data produced using automated methods, though such automation
	requires data that has been produced in standardized ways. A goal of
	EMAP is developing computational tools capable of further
	automation.
EMAGE provides a variety of search and analysis
	tools for investigating data. Users can search the online resources
	by embryo space, anatomical structure, or by gene/protein. EMAP has
	developed JAtlasViewer, a Java program that allows viewing virtual
	sections of three-dimensional images, such as mouse embryo models.
	They have also developed WlzIIP server and viewer, providing access
	to large three-dimensional volumetric data sets, as well as the
	woolz libraries and binaries for image processing. Another goal of
	the project is to manage these data sets and to make them available
	online. High-resolution sections and three-dimensional
	reconstructions of mouse embryos can create files in excess of ten
	gigabytes, which are too large for many computers to handle. These large files
	led Baldock and his collaborators to create computer server
	software that attempts to provide access to multidimensional
	embryological maps, which retain much of the information, without
	placing burdens on network bandwidth and users' computational
	resources.
Researchers at EMAP worked to determine how best to represent data-dense,
	three-dimensional images in digital databases that utilize data
	formats that researchers can store, analyze, and search. Other
	genomic database projects, such as GenBank, provide a contrast in
	that they focus on structural relations among the four nucleotides
	found in DNA: adenine, thymine, cytosine, and guanine, which researchers represent in computationally manageable ways, as A, T, C, and G.
	Developmental biologists' data, however, is more complex, including
	lists of RNAs, proteins, and other molecules
	synthesized during embryogenesis. Davidson and Baldock noted at
	EMAP's inception that explicating the functional roles of regulatory
	molecules in embryogenesis requires researchers to compare and interpret, across developmental stages and across species,
	when and where in developing organisms genes make proteins and other products. Such comparisons in turn require researchers to generate long lists
	that link gene expression data to specific areas of anatomy during
	development. These lists are what researchers store in the databases. 
 Sources Baldock,
		Richard, and Albert Burger. "Anatomical Ontologies: Names and
		Places in Biology." Genome Biology 6 (2005): 108–8. http://
		genomebiology.com/2005/6/4/108 (Accessed February 28,
		2014).
Baldock, Richard, Jonathan Bard, Kaufman Matthew, and Duncan
Davidson. "A Real Mouse for Your Computer." BioEssays 14 (1992):
501–2.
Bard, Jonathan, Richard Baldock and Duncan Davidson. "Elucidating
the Genetic Networks of Development: A Bioinformatics Approach."
Genome Research 8 (1998): 859–63. http://genome.cshlp.
org/content/8/9/859.full (Accessed February 28, 2014).
Bard, Jonathan, Matthew Kaufman, Christophe Dubreuil, Renske M.
Brune, Albert Burger, Richard Baldock, and Duncan Davidson. "An
Internet-accessible Database of Mouse Developmental Anatomy Based on a
Systematic Nomenclature." Mechanisms of Development 74 (June
1998): 111–20. http://dx.doi.org
/10.1016/S0925-4773(98)00069-0 (Accessed February 28, 2014).
Davidson, Duncan, and Richard Baldock. "Bioinformatics Beyond
Sequence: Mapping Gene Function in the Embryo." Nature Reviews
Genetics 2 (2001): 409–17.
Davidson, Duncan, Jonathan Bard, Matthew H. Kaufman, and Richard
Baldock. "The Mouse Atlas Database: A Community Resource for Mouse
Development." TRENDS in Genetics 17 (2001): 49–51.
Davidson, Duncan, Jonathan Bard, Renske Brune, Albert Burger,
Christophe Dubreuil, Bill Hill, Matthew Kaufman, Jane Quinn, Margaret
Stark, and Richard Baldock. "The Mouse Atlas and Graphical
Gene-Expression Database." Seminars in Cell &amp; Developmental
Biology 8 (1997): 509–17. 
Deutsch, Eric W., Catherine A. Ball, Jules J. Berman, Steven G.
Bova, Alvis Brazma, Roger E. Bumgarner, David Campbell et al. "Minimum
Information Specification for In Situ Hybridization and
Immunohistochemistry Experiments (MISFISHIE)." Nature
Biotechnology 26 (2008): 305–12.http://www.nature.com/nbt/journal/v26/n3/full/nbt1391.html (Accessed June 11, 2014). 
Downs, Karen M., and Timothy Davies. "Staging of Gastrulating Mouse
Embryos by Morphological Landmarks in the Dissecting Microscope."
Development 118 (1993): 1255–66. http://dev.
biologists.org/content/118/4/1255.full.pdf (Accessed February 28,
2014)
e-Mouse Atlas. http://www.emouseatlas.org/ (Accessed June 11, 2014).
Gkoutos, Georgios V., Jeffery E. Green, Ann-Marie Mallon, John M.
Hancock, and Duncan Davidson. "Building Mouse Phenotype Ontologies."
Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing 9 (2004): 178–89.
Husz, Zsolt L., Nicholas Burton, Bill Hill, Nestor Milyaev, and
Richard Baldock. "Web Tools for Large-scale 3D Biological Images and
Atlases." BMC Bioinformatics 13 (2012): 122. http://www.
biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/13/122 (Accessed February 28,
2014).
Kaufman, Matthew H. Atlas of Mouse Development. London:
Academic Press, 1992.
Kaufman, Matthew H. "Postimplantation Development in the Mouse.
Ciba Foundation Symposium No. 165." Journal of Anatomy 181 (1992):
170–71. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1259769/ (Accessed June 11, 2014).
Richardson, Lorna, Shanmugasundaram Venkataraman, Peter Stevenson,
Yiya Yang, Nicholas Burton, Jianguo Rao, Malcolm Fisher, Richard A.
Baldock, Duncan R. Davidson and Jeffrey H. Christiansen. "EMAGE Mouse
Embryo Spatial Gene Expression Database: 2010 Update." Nucleic Acids
Research 38 (2010): 703–9. http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2808994 (Accessed February 28,
2014).
Theiler, Karl. The House Mouse: Atlas of Embryonic
Development. New York: Springer, 1989.  

How to cite
Miller, Shawn A., "The e-Mouse Atlas Project (1992- )". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-06-11). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/7902.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Thursday, June 12, 2014 - 23:53
 Topic
Subject
Embryos; Databases, Genetic; Development;  Technology