By M. Elizabeth Barnes
Published: 2014-09-15
Keywords: Arthur Marshall, Julia Platt, neural crest cells, neurocristopathies
 Neural CrestEarly in the process of development, vertebrate embryos develop a
fold on the neural plate where the neural and epidermal ectoderms meet,
called the neural crest. The neural crest produces neural crest cells
(NCCs), which become multiple different cell types and contribute to
tissues and organs as an embryo develops. A few of the organs and
tissues include peripheral and enteric (gastrointestinal) neurons and
glia, pigment cells, cartilage and bone of the cranium and face, and
smooth muscle. The diversity of NCCs that the neural crest produces has
led researchers to propose the neural crest as a fourth germ layer, or
one of the primary cellular structures in early embryos from which all adult tissues and
organs arise. Furthermore, evolutionary biologists study the neural crest
because it is a novel shared evolutionary
character (synapomorphy) of all vertebrates.
 Although the neural crest first appears in the embryo during
gastrulation, the invagination and spreading process by which a
blastula becomes a gastrula, it becomes distinguishable during the
neurula stage. The neurula-stage of development occurs when the neural
plate folds and transforms into the neural tube, the structure that
will eventually develop into the central nervous system. The neural
crest arises at two junctions, one on each side of the midline of the
neural plate, between neural and non-neural ectoderm. As neurulation
progresses and the neural tube forms, the two junctions meet at the top
of the neural tube. Then the neural crest separates from the neural
tube, a process called delamination, and subsequently migrates away
from the neural tube. Some researchers argue that the interaction
between the neural and epidermal ectoderm stimulates the genesis of the neural crest. 
 However, most scientists treat the neural ectoderm as the progenitor of neural
crest cells, as the neural crest gives rise to neurons and
ganglia, the latter of which are bundles of neurons that lie on the
periphery of the nervous system, outside the brain and the spinal cord.
Furthermore, fate mapping of neural crest cells has also placed them in
the neural ectoderm. Researchers have studied NCCs because of the
diversity of cell types that neural crest gives rise to. For instance, NCCs provide a useful model for studying
stem cells because like stem cells, they have the potential to
differentiate into a diverse number of cell types.
This graphic displays how neural crest cells form and migrate in different kinds of vertebrate animals. 
  Once the neural tube
is formed, the neural crest cells (NCCs) differentiate into cardiac NCCs
(CarNCCs), trunk NCCs (tNCCs), cranial NCCs (cNCCs), or vagal and sacral
NCCs. The differentiation subjects the NCCs to different chemical
environments, ultimately resulting in their development into different
cell types and tissues. First, the vagal and sacral NCCs migrate away
from the neural tube's trunk through loosely packed cells, called
mesenchyme, that are between the neural tube, epidermis, and somites of
the mesoderm. These cells become gastrointestinal enteric ganglia and
the parasympathetic ganglia of the neck. Some tNCCs migrate through one
sub pathway that travels dorsolaterally into the ectoderm and eventually
to the midline of the belly, to pigment cells. Other tNCCs migrate
laterally, eventually becoming a part of the developing brain,
specifically sensory and sympathetic neurons, Schwann cells, and
adrenomedullary cells. cNCCs develop into pigment cells, neurons, and
glia as well, but these are the only NCCs that contribute to the
cartilage and bone of the face and skull. cNCCs are responsible for the
development of the cartilage and connective tissue in the face as well
as the thyroid glands. CarNCCs, on the posterior region of the neural
crest, migrate dorsolaterally and form the septum of the pulmonary
artery and the aorta, as well as the endothelium in the aortic arch
arteries. 
 Researchers studied the neural crest in the middle of the
nineteenth century. In 1868, Wilhelm His, an embryologist in Basel,
Switzerland, studying chick, or Gallus gallus embryos, identified a layer
of cells above the neural tube as the progenitors of spinal and cranial
ganglia. He called it the Zwischenstrang (intermediate cord). In 1874,
His named it an organ-forming germinal region. However, what he
identified was not the neural crest, but a subset of NCCs that had
migrated from the neural crest to a position above the neural tube.
Historians trace the first use of the term neural crest to a paper
published in 1879 by Arthur Marshall, a professor at Owens
College in Manchester, England. In 1878, while also studying chick
embryos, he used the term neural ridge to describe the same cells that
His had discovered above the neural tube, but he later revised his
definition. Marshall coined the term neural crest to describe the two
junctions between the neural and epidermal ectoderm that arise before
the neural tube is complete.  He proclaimed that henceforth the term
neural ridge should only be used to identify the band of cells that
arise from the neural crest, which migrate above the neural tube once
neurulation is complete. 
 In 1893, Julia Platt identified NCCs from
ectoderm as the progenitors of cartilage in the face and in the
pharyngeal arch skeletons of the teeth of mudpuppies (Necturus
maculosus). She researched at several institutions in the late
nineteenth century, including the Marine Biological Laboratory, in Woods
Hole, Massachusetts, and the University of Freiburg in Freiburg, Germany.
Many researchers rejected Platt's interpretation; partly because Germ
Layer Theory, then an entrenched theory, claimed that each of the three
germ layers developed into the same kinds of structures across many
kinds of organisms. Researchers claimed that Platt's theory of neural
crest, and thus, ectoderm-derived, pharyngeal arch skeletons, was
impossible because skeletal tissues originated solely from the mesoderm.
Forty years later, in the 1920s and 1930s, researchers confirmed
Platt's conclusion. In the 1950s, researchers began to further study
skeletal tissues that developed from the neural crest.
  In 1950, Sven
Hörstadius published The Neural Crest: Its Properties and Derivatives in
the Light of Experimental Research. In this monograph, which Hörstadius
based on lectures given at the University of London in London, England,
he reviewed experiments on the neural crest. His review
combined data from over two hundred and fifty papers. Hörstadius' work
referred to experiments that verified Platt's conclusions, and it entrenched the neural
crest as an area of biological investigation. 
 In the 1960s, neural crest researchers examined how the trunk and cranial NCCs migrate and give rise
to other tissues. In 1963 James Weston at Yale University in New Haven,
Connecticut, published "A Radioautographic Analysis of the Migration and
Localization of Trunk Neural Crest Cells in the Chick." In that article,
Weston argued that integumental melanoblasts migrated from the neural
crest to the ectoderm. In 1966, Malcolm Johnston, at the University of
Rochester in Rochester, New York, published a similar study on cNCCs
titled "A Radioautographic Study of the Migration and Fate of Cranial
Neural Crest Cells in the Chick Embryo," in which he traced the end
point of more NCCs, finding for example that some turned into connective tissues in
the face. During the 1960s, researchers began to use avian
embryos instead of the previously used amphibian embryos.
  Researchers
in the 1970s composed maps that chronicled the NCCs's movements.
Researchers discovered that the different chemical environments in which
NCCs originated caused them to differentiate into
different kinds of cells and travel throughout the embryos. They also
identified abnormalities in organisms that arise from defects in the
development of the neural crest, called neurocristopathies.
  In the
1980s, researchers discovered Hox genes, genes that help cause embryos
to develop according to major body axes. These genes guide the migratory
patterns of cells. Discovery of the Hox genes allowed researchers to
trace the molecular cause of different migration patterns of NCCs,
leading to further subdivisions in the classification of NCCs. These
classifications include the vagal and sacral NCCs that contribute to the
enteric ganglia and neurons of the parasympathetic nervous system. Researchers also discovered that cardiac NCCs contributed to
tissues in the developing heart.
  Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, researchers compared
the development of the neural crest across taxa to test hypotheses about
evolutionary ancestry. For example, biologists began to argue that
vertebrates developed their distinctive hearts and heads only after
their ancestors had evolved to have neural crests. This resulted in many
publications, one of which is Carl Gans and Glen Northcutt's "Neural
Crest and the Origin of Vertebrates: a New Head," published in 1983
while the two worked at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, Michigan. In
this paper, Gans and Northcutt argue that vertebrates became vertebrates
after a shift from passive to active modes of predation, concentrating
many vertebrate features in the head. 
 Researchers began arguing that the
neural crest is a germ layer at the turn of the twenty-first century.
Previously, researchers recognized three germ layers: the ectoderm,
mesoderm, and endoderm. In 1999 Brian Hall, at Dalhousie University
in Nova Scotia, Canada, published The Neural Crest And Neural Crest
Cells In Vertebrate Development And Evolution, in which he argued that
the neural crest meets the requirements to be a germ layer. First, he
claims that germ layers are defined as primary tissues from which an
embryo develops. Hall notes that there are two types of germ layers,
primary and secondary. The primary germ layers, the ectoderm and
endoderm appear first in the developing vertebrate embryo, before
fertilization. Some animals, which scientists call diploblastic, have
only these two germ layers. This group includes organisms such as
jellyfish and sponges. Tripoblastic animals, however, have a third germ
layer, called mesoderm, which evolved in animals whose ancestors were
diploblasts. These animals, called triploblasts, also belong to a group
called bilateria, which includes flat worms and humans, all of which have a primary axis of symmetry down the center of the body from head to tail.
  Researchers
consider the mesoderm a secondary germ layer because it arises from the
interactions of the first two germ layers. Hall argues that like
mesoderm, neural crest is a secondary germ layer. He says that similar
to the mesoderm, the neural crest arises early in development from
interactions in a primary germ layer, the ectoderm. Also, it contributes
to a large number of tissues and organs. Furthermore, the neural crest
is a vertebrate synapomorphy, like mesoderm is a bilaterian
synapomorphy. Hall claims that the neural crest appears after the
evolution of the tripoblasts. Therefore, he argues that the animals that
came subsequently, the vertebrates, should be called tetrablastic,
meaning four layers. Hall argues that because the neural crest appears
early in development, because it is ectodermal in origin, and because it
is a vertebrate synapomorphy, it should be considered a secondary germ
layer. 
 In the first decades of the twentieth century, researchers traced
facial, pigment, heart, vision, and hearing abnormalities, including
cleft palate and albinism, to an abnormal development of the neural
crest and NCCs. Researchers also debated the properties of the
mechanisms by which NCCs migrate. Furthermore, cancer researchers
studied the neural crest due to the similarity between NCCs and cancer
cells. The mechanisms by which NCCs migrate during development, the
specific signaling pathways, and transcription factors used by NCCs are
the same as cancer cells, making NCCs a model for studying how cancer
cells proliferate.
 Sources
Gans, Carl and Glen R. Northcutt. "Neural Crest and the Origin
of Vertebrates: a New Head." Science 220 (1983): 268–74.
Gilbert, Scott. "The Neural Crest." In Developmental Biology. 6th
edition. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, 2000.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK10065/ (Accessed May 2, 2014).
Hall, Brian K. The Neural Crest in Development and Evolution. New York:
Springer, 1999.
Hall, Brain K. "The Neural Crest as a Fourth Germ Layer and Vertebrates
as Quadroblastic Not Triploblastic." Evolution and Development 2 (2000):
3–5.
Hall, Brian K. "The Neural Crest and Neural Crest Cells: Discovery and
Significance for Theories of Embryonic Organization." Journal of
Biosciences 33 (2008): 781–93.
http://www.ias.ac.in/jbiosci/dec2008/781.pdf (Accessed May 2, 2014).
Hall, Brian K. The Neural Crest and Neural Crest Cells in Vertebrate
Development and Evolution. New York: Springer, 2009.
His, Wilhelm. Unsere Körperform und das physiologische Problem ihrer
Entstehung: Briefe an einen befreundeten Naturforscher. [Our Body Shape
and the Physiological Problem of its Origin: Letters to a Fellow
Naturalist]. Leipzig: FCW Vogel, 1874. http://dx.doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.3975
(Accessed May 2, 2014).
Hörstadius, Sven. The Neural Crest: its Properties and Derivatives in
the Light of Experimental Research. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1950.
Johnston, Malcolm. "A Radioautographic Study of the Migration and Fate
of Cranial Neural Crest Cells in the Chick Embryo." The Anatomical
Record 156 (1966): 143–56.
Marine Biological Laboratory. "Julia
Barlow Platt (1857-1935)." The Marine Biological Laboratory.
http://hermes.mbl.edu/publications/women_platt.html (Accessed May 2,
2014).
Marshall, Arthur. "Morphology of Vertebrate Olfactory Organ" Quarterly
Journal of Microscopic Science (1879): 300–40.
http://biodiversitylibrary.org/page/14704511 (Accessed May 2, 2014).
Mayor, Robert and Eric Theveneau. "The Neural Crest." Development 140
(2013): 2247–51. http://dev.biologists.org/content/140/11/2247.full (Accessed September 12, 2014).
Platt, Julia B. Ectodermic Origin of the Cartilages of the Head.
Massachusetts: Medford, 1894.
Purves, Dale, George Augustine, David Fitzpatrick, William Hall,
Anthony-Samuel Lamantia, Leonard E. White. "Early Brain Development." In Neuroscience. Sunderland, MA: Sinaur, 2012, 477–82.
Weston, James. "A Radioautographic Analysis of the Migration and
Localization of Trunk Neural Crest Cells in the Chick." Developmental
Biology 6 (1963): 279–310.
Zottoli, Steven and Ernst-August Seyfarth. "Julia B. Platt (1857–1935):
Pioneer Comparative Embryologist and Neuroscientist." Brain, Behavior,
and Evolution 43 (1994): 92–106.  

How to cite
Barnes, M. Elizabeth, "Neural Crest". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-09-15). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8197.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Wednesday, September 24, 2014 - 19:20
 Topic
Subject
Germ Layers; Neural Crest; Vertebrates; Development; His, Wilhelm, 1831-1904; Horstadius, Sven, 1898-1996; Hall, Brian K. (Brian Keith), 1941-; Concept