By Christopher Rojas
Published: 2015-01-26
Keywords: Michael Archer, de-extinction, gastric brooding frog, Somatic cell nuclear transfer
 The Southern Gastric-Brooding FrogThe Southern Gastric-Brooding Frog (Rheobatrachus
	silus) was an aquatic frog that lived in south-east Australia. In
	2002, the International Union for Conservation of Nature Red List
	declared the frog extinct, although no wild specimens had been
	reported since 1981. As the common name alludes to, the R.
	silus was a gastric-brooder, meaning that the female's eggs
	developed inside of her stomach. Weeks after ingestion, juvenile frogs
	escape through the mother's mouth. Because no other observed species
	performs this reproductive behavior, in the early twenty-first century R. silus became a target of
	the de-extinction movement that aims to resurrect extinct species.
	Researchers studied this frog's reproductive behavior and how the eggs
	and embryos escape digestion. Some scientists claimed that
	resurrecting this frog could result in future medical applications
	related to digestion and to reprogramming organ function, as during pregnancy, R. silus's stomach physiologically
	functioned as a uterus.
R. silus was first described in 1973 by David Liem in Australia, but
	its reproductive behavior was not discovered until the following
	year. In 1983, the International Union for Conservation of Nature
	(IUCN) headquartered in Gland, Switzerland, designated the species
	as vulnerable, meaning that it was at high risk of becoming
	endangered in the wild. Three years later in 1986, the IUCN
	officially listed R. silus as an endangered species, which
	meant that the species was at high risk of becoming extinct in the wild. However,
	scientists claimed that the frog was already extinct in the wild since
	1979, while tissue samples and remaining live frogs existed only in
	laboratories for a few years. All of the lab specimens had died by 1983. Although Liem described the species,
	Michael J. Tyler, an animal and veterinary scientist from the
	University of Adelaide in Adelaide, Australia, researched and described the reproductive behavior of the species in his 1983 book The Gastric Brooding Frog.
The physical features of the frog's reproductive system were
	similar to those in other frog species, and therefore scientists initially
	did not predict the brooding behavior. The frog was oval-shaped with
	grey skin and darker blotches. Its skin color camouflaged it in its
	environment of streams and rocks. Males grew to about 37
	millimeters long, while females could reach 55 millimeters in length. The
	female frogs lived for three to four years and matured around
	twenty-two to twenty-four months of age. During the second year of
	life, the frogs became sexually dimorphic and females grew at twice
	the rate as males.
The range of the R. silus covered approximately 1,400
	square kilometers in Australia, about 100 kilometers to the north of Adelaide,
	and 30 kilometers west of Sunshine Coast. The frog was
	found only in four water systems located within the Blackall and the
	Conondale Mountain Ranges, namely Mary River catchment, Mooloolah
	River catchment, Stanley River catchment, and Kilcoy creek. Inside
	these systems, 89 percent of sightings took place in rock pools,
	which are holes or cavities in rocks filled with water. R.
	silus favored deeper rock pools containing foliage or plant
	litter. In fast flowing areas of the streams there were few
	frogs, if any at all. Likewise, few flogs if any 
	inhabited areas without rock coverage. Researchers observed that the
	frogs rarely left water because they were slow and had limited
	leaping abilities on dry land, and those that did leave water began
	visibly dehydrating in less than five minutes. Due to scarcity of
	specimens, little is recorded about the frog's hibernation habits.
	Scientists assumed that those frogs found locales of hibernation in
	recluse, wet, crevices of rock pools.
In few frog species to parents care for their eggs after laying
	them. In contrast, R. silus mothers cared for their eggs after
	they were laid and fertilized. Researchers did not observe R.
	silus mothers ingesting their eggs, but they inferred that the
	mother ingested her eggs, as there was no other physiological pathway
	for them to enter the stomach. Thus, the precise stage of
	development at which the eggs were ingested is unrecorded. After the
	mother ingested her eggs, development continued normally, similar to
	other frog species. The frog's gestation period was estimated to be
	six to seven weeks. During this time, the mother fasted and was inactive, and her lungs collapse to allow room for the
	embryos to develop.
In 1973, scientists observed female frogs give oral birth. The
	mother vomited six tadpoles. Eighteen days later, the frog
	regurgitated a fully developed young. More births occurred in the
	following days, totaling sixteen progeny before the mother was
	euthanized to examine her stomach. Examinations of R. silus's
	stomach showed that physical and chemical alterations had taken
	place when compared to a non-gestating R. silus. The stomach
	functioned as a uterus, as the musculature and blood vessels altered
	their form in addition to a regress in secreting acids.
Researchers hypothesized about how both the mother and embryos
	survived the gestation process. One hypothesis in regards to the
	mother's survival was that her thin-walled stomach contained stretch receptors that satiated hunger. Because the
	young continued to grow, the mother did not feel the need to feed.
	At least one other frog species had gastric stretch receptors. That
	mechanism of R. silus's worked in conjunction with the young
	secreting a substance called prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), which
	inhibited the mother's gastric acid secretion. A second hypothesis said that in the absence of
	PGE2, the young would be dissolved like food. Researchers noted that the evidence for the hypothesis was
	circumstantial, as they retrieved PGE2 in aquarium water, on
	tadpole's skin, and in the mother's stomach. In addition, no
	researchers observed PGE2 inhibiting gastric acid secretion in
	any other species.
In 2013, Michael Archer at the University of New South Wales in Sydney, Australia, formed a research group
	focused on restoring R. silus. This group became called the
	Lazarus Project, after a biblical tale of resurrection. Archer garnered a lot of publicity for the lazarus project when he delivered a Ted Talk in Washington, D.C. 
	Tyler, a colleague of Archer's, studied the frog in the mid-1980s
	before it went extinct, and he kept a tissue sample in his lab's deep
	freezer. Researchers in the Lazarus Project extracted cell
	nuclei from the thawed R. silus tissue and implanted the material into
	egg cells from a similar amphibian, the Great Barred Frog
	(Mixophyes
	fasciolatus). With this process, called somatic cell
nuclear transplantation or cloning, by 2014 scientists had caused an embryo with genetic material from R.
	silus to reach early embryonic stages.   
 Sources Archer, Michael. "How We'll resurrect the Gastric Brooding Frog, the Tasmanian Tiger." TedxDeExtinction. Washington, D.C., March 2013. http://www.ted.com/talks/michael_archer_how_we_ll_resurrect_the_gastric_brooding_frog_the_tasmanian_tiger (Accessed January 19, 2014). 
Dankosky, John. "Project Seeks to Bring Extinct
		Species Back. National Public Radio, March 22, 2013.
		http://www.npr.org/2013/03/22/175054279/project-seeks-to-bring-extinct-species-back-to-life (Accessed May 23, 2014).
Corben, Christopher
		J., Glen J. Ingram, and Michael J. Tyler. "Gastric Brooding: Unique
		Form of Parental Care in an Australian Frog." Science 186
		(1974): 946–7.
Meyer, Ed., David Newell, Harry Hines, Sarah May, Jean-Marc Hero, John Clarke, Frank Lemckert. Rheobatrachus silus. The International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources Red List of Threatened Species, 2004. Version 2014.3
		http://www.iucnredlist.org/details/19475/0 (Accessed January 20, 2015).
Liem, Davis S. "A new genus of frog of the family
		Leptodactylidae from S.E. Queensland, Australia." Memoirs of the
		Queensland Museum 16 (1973): 459–70.
Tyler, Michael J., and
		David B. Carter. "Oral Birth of the Young of the Gastric
		Brooding Frog Rheobatrachus silus." Animal Behavior 29 (1981):
		280–2.
Tyler, Michael J., ed. The Gastric Brooding Frog. London:
		Croon Helm, 1983.
Tyler, Michael J., David J.C. Shearman, Rony
		Franco, Paul O'Brien, R. F. Seamark, and R. Kelly. "Inhibition
		of Gastric Acid Secretion in the Gastric Brooding Frog,
		Rheobatrachus silus." Science 220 (1983): 609–10.  

How to cite
Rojas, Christopher, "The Southern Gastric-Brooding Frog". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2015-01-26). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8282.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Friday, February 6, 2015 - 01:54
 Topic
Subject
 Breeding behavior; Reproductive behavior; Extinction (Biology); Extinct animals; Cloning; Frogs; Embryos; Australia; University of New South Wales; Tyler, Michael J.; Liem, David S.; Organism