By Valerie Racine
Published: 2014-10-24
Keywords: bricolage, tinkering
 "Evolution and Tinkering" (1977), by Francois JacobIn his essay "Evolution and Tinkering," published in
	Science in 1977, François Jacob argues that a common analogy
	between the process of evolution by natural selection and the
	methods of engineering is problematic. Instead, he proposes to
	describe the process of evolution with the concept of
	bricolage (tinkering). In this essay, Jacob does not deny the
	importance of the mechanism of natural selection in shaping complex
	adaptations. Instead, he maintains that the cumulative effects of
	history on the evolution of life, made evident by molecular data,
	provides an alternative account of the patterns depicting the
	history of life on earth. Jacob's essay contributed to
	genetic research in the late twentieth century that emphasized
	certain types of topics in evolutionary and developmental biology,
	such as genetic regulation, gene duplication events, and the genetic
	program of embryonic development. It also proposed why, in future
	research, biologists should expect to discover an underlying
	similarity in the molecular structure of genomes, and that they
	should expect to find many imperfections in evolutionary history
	despite the influence of natural selection.
The author of the
	article, François Jacob, studied enzyme expression and regulation in
	bacteria and bacteriophages at the Institut Pasteur in Paris,
	France. In 1965, Jacob won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
	with André M. Lwoff and Jacques L. Monod for their work on
	the genetic control of enzyme and virus synthesis. At the Institut
	Pasteur, Jacob and his colleagues constructed a
	model of gene regulation according to which regulatory proteins in
	cells interact to switch on or off genes, and thus control
	physiological processes. They named this regulatory mechanism an
	operon, and hypothesized that it existed in the cells of all living
	organisms. Subsequent research confirmed their hypothesis. The
	ubiquity of regulation processes found at the molecular level led
	Jacob to consider its implications for evolutionary biology.
Jacob was also influenced by the work of Claude
	Lévi-Strauss, who was affiliated to Collège de France in
	Paris, France, and who applied the theoretical framework of structural
	linguistics to anthropology. Lévi-Strauss argued that
	researchers could analyze human communication through the various
	relations between the signifier and the signified and the changes in
	the relations between these units. In a similar way, Jacob said that
	the study of evolution could benefit from the analysis of the main
	units in molecular biology, such as the structural genes and the
	regulatory genes, and from the analysis of the changes in the
	relations between the units involved in the regulation of cell
	physiology. In his 1977 essay, "Evolution and Tinkering," Jacob
	assimilated his knowledge of molecular biology into his
	philosophical ideas about the nature of science and scientific
	method.
The essay has ten sections. Jacob begins with an
	outline of his conception of the scientific worldview and the
	relationship between the natural and social sciences. In the first
	two sections, Jacob states that science is a human product that
	consists of a series of cultural attempts to delimit the possible by
	framing explanatory systems and bestowing unity and coherence upon
	the world. Like mythology, science attempts to explain the actual by
	delineating the possible, including the unknown or the invisible.
	Science, Jacob claims, can be differentiated from other cultural
	myths by its commitment to experimentation, and its ongoing process
	of criticism and revision. As such, science aims to provide only
	partial and provisional answers to questions about the world. The
	history of science, according to Jacob, depicts a pattern in which
	scientific knowledge begins as isolated pieces of knowledge in
	particular scientific domains, and develops into a unified account
	of phenomena.
In the third section, "The Hierarchy of
	Object," Jacob addresses the challenges of studying objects, such as
	living organisms, human language and behaviour, and social and
	economic structures. Jacob argues against what he calls
	methodological reductionism, stating that it would be absurd to try
	to explain something complex, like democracy, by appealing to the
	structure and properties of its elementary physical particles.
	Nonetheless—Jacob notes—the laws that govern elementary physical
	particles constrain every higher level object of study,
	including political structures. Lower levels of the hierarchy of
	objects limit the range of possibilities for objects in higher
	levels.
In the fourth section, "Constraints and History,"
	Jacob states that most objects of scientific study are complex
	organizations or systems influenced by a combination of constraints
	and history. For instance, he argues that emergent properties of a
	system can be explained by appealing to the components of the
	system, but they cannot be deduced from them. In other words, one
	can not predict the emergent properties of complex systems, like
	cells' and organisms' properties, from the properties of their
	components. The complex nature of the objects of study constrains
	predictions. Thus, such objects require examination at more than one
	level of analysis. Furthermore, Jacob argues that, because complex

objects can result from evolutionary processes, they are also constrained by history.
	 For example, scientists have shown that the structure of a
	cell relies on its molecular elements and composition. However,
	Jacob notes, any evidence of these molecular elements in prebiotic
	time is not sufficient to explain the origin of life on earth.
	Historical conditions, including highly contingent events, have
	played a role in the origin of life.
In the next two
	sections, Jacob introduces and develops the metaphor of tinkering to
	bring into focus the historical character of evolutionary theory.
	Jacob begins, in the fifth section, by describing the process of
	natural selection as an imposition of constraints on open systems,
	or organisms. Natural selection, according to Jacob, is both a
	negative and a positive force. It is negative in the sense that it
	works to eliminate less fit variants in a population, and it is
	positive in the sense that it works to integrate mutations that
	accumulate over time to produce adaptations. Jacob states that
	natural selection's creative force is evident in its ability to
	recombine old material into novelties; new structures, new organs,
	and even new species.
In section six, "Evolution and
	Tinkering," Jacob dismisses a comparison between natural selection
	and engineering for three reasons. First, unlike natural selection,
	an engineer works according to a pre-conceived plan of the final
	product. Second, an engineer actively chooses her materials and has
	access to the best tools designed for accomplishing the task at
	hand. Natural selection, in contrast, affects the structurally and
	functionally imperfect parts of the biotic world and reconfigures
	existing systems into novel ones. Third, if the engineer is
	successful, the final product achieves a level of perfection.
	Evolution by natural selection, however, yields imperfect products.
	For these three reasons, Jacob rejects an analogy between natural
	selection and engineering, and instead he proposes the metaphor that
	natural selection is like a bricoleur (tinkerer). Like
	natural selection, a tinkerer works with no specific end in mind,
	collecting any materials at his disposal, and rearranges them into a
	workable object. Thus, contingency constitutes the main feature of
	evolutionary processes.
Jacob further elaborates this analogy
	in the seventh section, "Evolution as Tinkering." Different
	tinkerers, Jacob argues, likely develop different solutions to
	similar problems. For example, evolution has resulted in different
	types of eyes—pinhole, lens, and multiple tubes—to address the issue
	of how organisms use light to perceive the world. In these
	cases, natural selection used materials at its disposal to form
	differently-structured adaptations to similar problems. Here, Jacob
	underscores the claim that evolution never produces new forms from
	scratch.
Jacob argues that this tinkering characteristic of
	evolutionary processes is most evident at the molecular level. In
	section eight, "Molecular Tinkering," he explains that all living
	organisms, both unicellular and multicellular, exhibit an underlying
	unity in their chemical structures and functions. Jacob states that,
	because all life shares the same organic molecules and similar
	metabolic pathways, it is more probable that new functional proteins
	have arisen from a rearrangement of genetic elements than it is that those proteins appeared
	 anew. As evidence, Jacob cites the discovery that
	similar DNA sequences from organisms as distantly related as fruit
	flies and pigs help cause structures as different as wings and legs
	to develop.
To support his analogy, Jacob appeals to a
	hypothesis of Susumu Ohno's, who worked at City of Hope Medical Center in
	Duarte, California. Ohno presented the hypothesis in 1970, and it is about the logic of gene
	duplication events in evolutionary history. When a gene gets
	copied or duplicated in a genome, the new gene lacks the functional
	constraints of the old gene. In such cases, the duplicated copy can
	accumulate beneficial or neutral mutations with little deleterious
	effect on the overall fitness of the organism. This accumulation can
	lead to the re-arrangement of genetic elements, so that existing
	structures can acquire new functions. This hypothesis of genomic
	change, Jacob argues, illustrates the process of tinkering.
According to Jacob, molecular biologists have shown that most
	morphological change in vertebrates has not resulted from new
	structural genes, but rather it is the consequence of a change in
	the regulation of genetic components, including events like
	heterotopy, a change in the spatial location of developmental
	events, and heterochrony, a change in the timing of developmental
	events. Jacob argues that these events occur in embryonic
	development according to the precise schedule of a genetic program,
	suggesting that gene regulation is the key factor in the generation
	of animals' forms and functions.
In the ninth section, Jacob
	outlines two consequences of the metaphor of evolution as a process
	of tinkering. First, if his analogy holds, then biologists
	should expect to find similarities in the underlying molecular
	elements of different species. For example, Jacob argues,
	biochemists have discovered hormone peptides that
	trigger a variety of chemical reactions in cells from organisms in different species. Second, biologists
	should expect to see many imperfections or redundancies in the
	design of organisms. For instance, Jacob explains, the human
	reproductive system illustrates a less than perfect mechanism in
	which almost half of the total number of conceptions result in no
	viable fetuses.
Jacob ends his essay with a final example of
	tinkering, arguing that the human brain is a product of highly
	contingent, historical events. Jacob contends that, in humans,
	the addition of the neo-cortex to the rhinencephalon, a primitive
	part of the brain responsible for the sense of smell and theorized
	to control instinct, has set the conditions
	for the evolution of the human brain. The human brain is thus the
	result of an imperfect patchwork of a structure controlling visceral
	or emotional drives, the rhinencephalon, and a structure controlling
	more sophisticated cognitive abilities, the neo-cortex. This case
	can be extrapolated, Jacob argues, to a general rule for evolution:
	evolution is the net result of a particular sequence of historical
	opportunities.
Jacob's essay had, at first, a mixed
	reception. Many biologists said that the description of evolution by
	natural selection as a process of tinkering was blatantly obvious.
	In 1983 Walter Gehring and his team at the
	University of Basel in Basel, Switzerland, discovered of a standard set of DNA sequences called the Homeobox in genes that controlled the embryonic development
	of body plans of animals. Scientists soon found the Homeobox in genes of diverse organisms from flies to humans. Given those results, scientists
	explicitly  began referring to Jacob's essay and to his concept of
	tinkering.
In 1982, Jacob published a series of lectures
	given at the University of Washington in Seattle, Washington, under
	the title  The Possible and the Actual, which includes a
	slightly modified version of his original essay, "Evolution and
	Tinkering," as well as some essays expounding his philosophy of
	science. In 2006, the Novartis Foundation in London, United Kingdom,
	held a symposium on the concept of tinkering in evolution and
	development. By the second decade of the twenty-first century, scientists had cited "Evolution and Tinkering" thousands of times. 
 Sources Artmann, Stefan.
		"Four Principles of Evolutionary Pragmatics in Jacob's
		Philosophy of 	Modern Biology." Axiomathes 14 (2004):
		381–395.
Carroll, Sean B. Endless Forms Most Beautiful. New
		York & London: W.W. Norton & Co., 2005.
Jacob, François. "Evolution and Tinkering." Science
		196 (1977): 1161–1166.
Jacob, François. The Possible and the Actual. Seattle: University of Washington 	Press, 1982.
Laubichler, Manfred. "Tinkering: a Conceptual and Historical
		Evaluation." In Tinkering: The Microevolution of Development,
		Novartis Foundation Symposium 284. New York: John
		Wiley, 2007: 20–34.
Lieberman, Daniel E., and Brian K. Hall. "The evolutionary
		developmental biology of tinkering: an introduction to the
		challenge." In Tinkering: The Microevolution of Development,
		Novartis Foundation Symposium 284. New York: John
		Wiley, 2007: 1–19.
McGinnis, William, Michael, Levine, Ernst, Hafen, Atsushi,
		Kuroiwa, Walter, Gehring. "A conserved DNA sequence in homoeotic
		genes of the Drosophila Antennapedia and bithorax complexes."
		Nature 308 (1984): 428–33.
Morange, Michel. "French Tradition and the rise of
		Evo-devo." Theory in Biosciences 126 (2007):
		149–153.
Nobel Prize Foundation. Nobel Prize in Medicine or
		Physiology 1965. http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates
		/1965/ (Accessed 16 March 2014).
Ohno, Susumu. Evolution by Gene Duplication. New
		York: Springer-Verlag, 1970.  

How to cite
Racine, Valerie, ""Evolution and
Tinkering" (1977), by Francois Jacob". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-10-24). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8227.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Friday, October 24, 2014 - 20:02
 Topic
Subject
 Institut Pasteur (Paris, France); Jacob, Francois, 1920-2013; Operons; Genetic regulation; Nobel Prizes; Gene Expression Regulation; Evolution; Natural selection; Engineering; Homeobox genes; Literature