By LaTourelle,
Jonathon J.
Published: 2014-10-02
Keywords: Assisted Reproduction, Warnock Report
 "The Report of the
Committee of Inquiry into Human Fertilisation and Embryology" (1984), by
Mary Warnock and the Committee of Inquiry into Human Fertilisation and
Embryology.The Report of the Committee of Inquiry into Human
Fertilisation and Embryology, commonly called the Warnock Report
after the chair of the committee Mary Warnock, is the 1984 publication
of a UK governmental inquiry into the social impacts of infertility
treatment and embryological research. The birth of Louise Brown in 1978
in Oldham, UK, sparked debate about reproductive and embryological
technologies. Brown was conceived through in vitro fertilization
(IVF), a process of fertilization that occurs outside of the body of the
woman. At the time IVF was largely unregulated in the UK, both in law
and within the protocol of the National Health Service (NHS),
headquartered in London, UK. The Warnock Report recommended, and is
credited with, establishing a governmental organization to regulate
infertility treatments such as IVF and embryological research in
general. In 1990, the UK established this governmental organization as
the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (HFEA) in London. 
The Warnock Report is comprised of a philosophical foreword, thirteen
chapters, a table of abstracted specific recommendations from those
chapters, and three expressions of dissent. Of the thirteen chapters,
the first two explain the methods and scope of the inquiry. The third
through the eighth are about techniques of alleviating infertility. The
ninth and tenth chapters detail ancillary concerns to infertility, such
as the storage of eggs, sperm, and embryos. Chapters eleven and twelve
review issues with embryological research and possible future
technologies. And chapter thirteen recommends the establishment of a
governmental body that has authority over human fertilization and
embryological research.  Starting with the foreword, the Warnock
Report makes explicit its philosophical pluralism. The report states
that people within society have various views on issues concerning
assisted reproduction and embryology, and likewise people within the
committee had differing views. These differing views are presented as a
virtue: each member came to the committee with their own values, but all
agreed to base the committee's conclusion on “argument rather than on
sentiment.” The foreword rejects a cost benefit analysis of
assisted reproductive technologies and embryological research, arguing
that the moral character of the issues involved demanded an answer to
the question of whether it is right that those technologies be allowed
in the first place. The Report says that no calculation of aggregate
good for society could answer that question. It goes on to argue that
some limits on behavior must be in place for any society to be moral.
This, it says, is especially true surrounding issues of birth and death,
the value of human life, and the structure of the family. The Warnock
Report says that the ultimate concern to be addressed by the committee
was the question what kind of society is morally praiseworthy, and what
recommendations are appropriate to make the current society more morally
praiseworthy. Chapter one of the report describes the background
to the debate, highlighting the first human birth resulting from in
vitro fertilization in July 1978. It goes on to say that IVF could
potentially open two promising new horizons: the alleviation of
infertility and new embryological remedies to birth defects. The Warnock
Report says that society at large was full of the sense that assisted
reproductive technology was developing too rapidly. The committee was
established in July of 1982 to consider, and make recommendations
concerning, technologies used in assisted reproduction and in the
embryological research that supported it.
Chapter one also details the scope of the inquiry, which included
surrogacy, in vitro fertilization, and artificial insemination,
but not abortion and contraception. The authors note that because the
science was rapidly changing, the report also has a limited scope in
time, and they suggest that future developments in technology will
eventually call for the careful consideration of issues not foreseen by
this inquiry. The Warnock Report then divides into two general parts.
First, in chapters three through eight, the report addresses individual
level problems with infertility and the social context of those
individuals. It then addresses the goal of the pursuit of knowledge as a
benefit to society, in this case embryological research, in chapters
eleven and twelve. 
Chapters two through eight each have a general and somewhat
consistent formal outline. In each chapter a topic or medical procedure
is introduced and described. First the report reviews arguments against
the acceptability of a topic or procedure, then replies to those
arguments are given. After the arguments and replies are considered, the
view of the committee is presented, along with specific recommendations
with respect to implementation and policy making the committee finds
appropriate. 
Chapter two of the report is on individuals and their needs with
respect to infertility services. The first part of this chapter explores
the emotional and social reality of a childless couple. Particularly the
report says that that couples’ reality includes the expectations of
friends, family, and religious communities, that they reify the family
with children. The report defines the family as the institution of
society in which human children develop their individual identities,
social behavior, and self-worth. It goes on to say that for many,
identity as an individual in society is confirmed and enhanced by their
participation in the family as a social institution. This is all
intended to say that if a childless couple is biologically incapable of
having children through normal methods, they may feel that they’re
unable to fulfill their own, as well as other people’s, social
expectations. The couple may feel excluded from a wide range of normal
human activities that for them are necessarily part of a fulfilled life.
Additionally, many people express the desire to see their genetic
material perpetuated and the report says that this and other desires
cannot be answered with adoption. The central question of this chapter
is whether or not infertility is a condition that warrants
treatment.  The report examines three arguments against treating
infertility: first that the world is overpopulated; second that it is
wrong to interfere with nature or with God's plan; and third that the
desire for a child is a desire, not a need. The report explicitly
excludes the argument against infertility treatment on the grounds that
the world is overpopulated. The report says that overpopulation is
outside of the scope of the committee, which was not concerned with the
world at large but individuals within society that pursue infertility
treatment. Additionally, the report notes that the number of additional
births because assisted reproductive technologies is unlikely to be
consequential compared to the background birth rate. 
The report then reviews arguments against assisted reproductive
technologies and embryological research that appeal to nature or to
God’s plan. This argument against assisted reproduction contends that
various forms of assisted reproductive technology introduce a third
party, for example an egg donor, into an exclusive relationship and by
so doing undermine the unity of marriage. In addition to this third
party, the argument runs, the procedure itself is unnatural and
therefore unethical. At least in part these objections to the procedures
were founded on the view that masturbation, as well as chemically
stimulated ovulation, is morally impermissible. Here and elsewhere the
Warnock Report suggests that no coherent notion of the concepts
natural and unnatural are on offer, making this concern
religious and personal. The Warnock Report suggests that many people may
feel that infertility violates the exclusivity of their marriage, and
for them this procedure might not be appropriate.  However many people
do not feel this way, and, the report contends, it would be wrong to bar
them from treatment because of the particular, mostly religious, beliefs
of some portion of society The third argument that the report
considers against infertility treatments concerns the needfulness of
infertility treatment, given scarce resources. This objection contends
that having a child is not a right but a luxury, and that as such the
National Health Service should not be obliged to cover it. The committee
argues in the report that this objection was not an objection to
assisted reproduction at all, but rather a general concern with the
allocation of funding within the National Health Service (NHS). The
Warnock Report further says that many treatments covered by the NHS also
addressed desires rather than needs, if by needs we mean only those
treatments that without access to the patient would die. 
Through their response to these three criticisms, the authors of The
Warnock Report, representing the considered judgment of the committee,
concludes that infertility was a condition meriting treatment. They then
addresses issues about general eligibility criteria for participation in
treatments. The report argues that treatment should not be contingent
upon the character or past conduct of the couple or individual seeking
treatment, since no fertile couple faces those kinds of barriers to
reproduction. The report argues that single women, men, and lesbian
couples should not be barred from having children, however the report
strongly suggests that it is best that a child be cared for in the
context of a heterosexual family with one father and one mother. The
report states that recommending general eligibility criterion for all
cases is not possible, therefore decisions on individual cases should be
left to the doctor’s discretion. 
Chapter three considers common questions about the social and legal
consequences of assisted reproductive treatments; specifically how
anonymity should be preserved between donors and contracting infertile
couples. The report recommends counseling for the couples and third
parties during all stages of treatment. The conditions for medical
consent concerning all parties involved are likewise detailed. 
Chapter four deals with donor-assisted artificial insemination (AI)
in the case where the donor is the husband (AIH) and where the donor is
a third party (AID). The first section of the chapter described
artificial insemination, a mechanical process of fertilization whereby
fertilization occurs in the woman, or in vivo, is described and
some of the history of the procedure’s use is detailed. Only one
objection to AIH is raised, namely that it is unnatural and involves
masturbation. The report suggests that people who feel this way will
obviously not want to have artificial insemination themselves, but that
they cannot impose this view on those who feel otherwise about
masturbation. The committee recommended the acceptability of AIH,
however at the same time expressing concern over cases where a husband
is dead before the sperm is used for fertilization, an issue addressed
in depth in chapter ten.
The report suggests that AID was more controversial than AIH for two
reasons. First, some people considered it a form of adultery. This was
the opinion Geoffrey Fisher, the Archbishop of Canterbury, when,
according to the Warnock Report, his report on artificial insemination
was published in 1948. Under the Archbishop’s recommendation, AID should
be a criminal offense. From then until 1982, when the inquiry under
discussion was established, human embryological research, AIH, and AID
were of uncertain legality. The reports reply to the charge of adultery
rested on the consent of the husband, which was assumed in the case of a
married infertile couple. The Warnock Report also argues that adultery
is a sign of a failing relationship, whereas a couple entertaining
assisted reproduction is a sign of commitment.
A second objection to AID that the committee considered and that the
report addresses is the claim that the father was more likely to not
love the child of AID because it would not be his biologically. This
child might therefore be stigmatized and perhaps the parents would feel
obliged to keep secret the precise nature of their child's birth. The
Warnock Report says that these were arguments against lying to children,
and for a change in the general social attitude towards children born
with the help of assistive reproductive technologies, and that they were
not arguments against the technologies themselves.
The Inquiry concludes that AIH and AID should be allowed under
license and that no fees should be paid for donation of sperm.
Additionally it recommends that the husband, when he has consented,
should be the legal father rather than the donor, who should have no
parental rights or duties whatsoever. Additionally, the report
recommends limiting a single sperm donor to at most ten children. The
Warnock Report recommends this limit out of a concern that no one person
be over represented in the gene pool, which might lead to involuntary
and unwitting incest. Chapter five is about in vitro
fertilization; the term literally means in glass but refers generally to
any fertilization that occurs outside of the body of the woman. The
report says that IVF was appropriate for perhaps five percent of
infertile couples that have medical difficulties that make AI
inappropriate. The IVF process entails drug-induced ovulation to make
the harvesting of multiple eggs possible. The harvested eggs are
fertilized outside of the body to create multiple viable embryos that
are then transferred into the uterus. 
The report reviews the objection to IVF on the grounds that it is not
in accord with the natural process of creating a child and because it
violates the unity of marriage by introducing third parties into an
exclusive relationship. However in this section the authors review two
new objections. Some considered it immoral to produce fertilized embryos
that would never be implanted on the grounds that it is unacceptable to
allow these unwanted embryos to die. Others suggested that NHS money
would be better spent elsewhere. The report does not answer the first
objection here, but elsewhere limits the use of human embryos to the
first fourteen-days after fertilization on the grounds that no
neurological structure was visible before that time. The Warnock Report
says that concerns over allocation of NHS funds were not arguments for
prohibition of fertility treatments, but instead arguments for the
rationing of funds. The report said that IVF should be available on a
controlled schedule. 
Chapter five of the Warnock Report details the outcome of a series of
IVF treatments carried out from October 1980 through December of 1983 at
Bourn Hall Clinic in Cambridge, UK. The report says that the outcomes at
Bourn Hall were promising and notes that no major congenital defects
have been described in the children produced from these case studies.
The report further says that IVF can be regarded as an established
treatment for infertility. As such the report recommends that IVF be
approved under the same licensing and inspection protocols as AI, and be
likewise available within the NHS.  Chapter six of the Warnock
Report reviews the problems of egg donation. The procedures involved in
egg donation are an intrinsic part of IVF care; however special
consideration is given here for cases in which the egg comes from a
third party. The report’s considerations and recommendations are the
same here as they were for AI and IVF procedures. Egg donation is
analogized to sperm donation and the Warnock Report recommends that the
female egg donor should be regarded as likewise having no rights or
duties with respect to any child that results from the procedure. 
Chapter seven reviews embryo donation. When a full embryo is donated
the recipient woman does not have to have been the donating woman: this
means that a child that is not genetically related to either of its
parents could be born to the infertile couple. Considering once again
objections to the practice on the grounds that it involves third party
intrusion into an exclusive relationship, the report counters that
embryo donation is a form of pre-natal adoption. The report recommends
that a procedure called lavage, whereby a donated egg would be
fertilized in the donating woman by AI and then flushed out several days
later to be collected and implanted in the recipient woman, should not
be approved in the mid 1980s, but that it should be considered further
as researchers developed the technique.  Chapter eight concerns
surrogacy. The committee outlines the general concept of surrogacy as a
woman who carries a child to term for another person or couple, whether
she contributes to the genetics of the child or not, and who usually
receives some payment. The Warnock Report discusses how legal disputes
between surrogates and the contracting individual or couple could be
adjudicated. The report argues that in cases where the surrogate mother
changes her mind and decides to keep the child, it is unlikely that any
court would force a separation on the grounds that the woman had a prior
contractual agreement. The report thereby concludes that surrogacy
contracts are unenforceable and therefore should be illegal. 
The report reviews three arguments against surrogacy. The authors
again present their argument against introducing a third party into an
exclusive relationship: if an individual subscribes to this argument,
they do not need to obtain surrogacy services for themselves. The second
objection suggests that there is a potential for in utero bonding
between the surrogate mother and the developing child; breaking this
bond could be detrimental to the child. The rejoinder to this offered by
the inquiry is that little is known about in utero bonds but that
these considerations don’t motivate anyone to prohibit adoption, and the
same should be the case with surrogacy. The third argument against
surrogacy offered is that there are significant risks for the surrogate
mother. The inquiry supplies the reply: surrogates don’t become
surrogates for no reason. They have made a choice to which there are
specific consent requirements. However, the Warnock Report rejects the
acceptability of surrogacy, saying that women might be tempted to
contract out their pregnancy for vanity sake. Furthermore, surrogacy
arrangements were legally unenforceable and so it was bound to cause
immense confusion with regard to parentage. It also recommends that the
UK government write laws detailing criminal liability for professionals
and others who bring about a surrogate pregnancy. 
Chapter nine deals with expanding infertility treatments to couples
that may not be infertile but for other medical reasons might find the
procedures necessary. Specifically this chapter deals with sex-linked
disorders. The report notes that sex-selection, the attempt to control
the sex of a child, might be undertaken for social rather than for
medical reasons, and it advises that the technology be closely
monitored.
Chapter ten provides recommendations about the freezing and storage
of human semen, eggs, and embryos to be used for AI and IVF. The Warnock
Report recommends that frozen semen and embryos should continue to be
used but that frozen egg therapeutic procedures should not be done until
more research demonstrating their safety and efficacy has been
performed. The report discusses the risks of storage and recommends a
five-year review to check for damaged frozen semen, eggs, and embryos.
The report recommends that legislation be enacted to ensure that there
is no right of ownership over a human embryo. The right to use or
dispose of the embryo was then detailed in the report. 
Chapter ten also details recommendations for inheritance laws
concerning children who are born from the sperm of an already dead
husband. The report suggests that AIH in these cases should be actively
discouraged, but that if a child was in utero at the date of
death of the father, that child should be viewed as illegitimate for
purposes of succession and inheritance. 
Chapter eleven moves away from infertility treatments and instead
concerns issues of scientific research. The first section of this
chapter details early embryonic development from egg fertilization
through cleavage to the morula stage, on to becoming a blastocyst and up
to the development of some early features: for example neural folds and
neural tubes, that are identifiable within the embryonic disc. After
detailing the early development of the embryo, the Warnock Report
suggests that the question of the moral status of a developing embryo is
pressing and obvious. The report states that it would not address the
question of personhood. Instead the report contends a different question
that is more tractable; namely, how ought we to treat a human embryo?

The Warnock Report outlines four potential concerns with the use of
human embryos in scientific research. The first view is that fertilized
embryos have a right to life. Any human life, on this view, has a right
to that life, whatever the stage, no matter how old or young or unborn.
Second, that embryos cannot give consent, not being rational agents. 
Third, that eugenics and trans-species hybridization are the likely
products of embryological experimentation. And finally that the moral
worth of an embryo, and the moral law prohibiting their exploitation,
outweighs any potential benefits that might accrue to society from
future scientific research.
In addition to the four arguments against the use of human embryos in
scientific research, the Warnock Report outlines three reasons for their
use. First, that an embryo is not a human person and that there's no
reason to accord these developing cells special protected status.
Second, that while some additional respect might be owed to a developing
human embryo, that respect can be weighted against the benefits of
research. And third, that no animal model alternatives are suitable
experimental subjects for disorders that occur only in humans. The
report recommends that experimentation on human embryos should only be
undertaken if animal embryos are unsuitable for the same research. It
goes on to recommend that human embryos be afforded some protection in
the law, but not the same as a living child or an adult.
The report argues that even though development is a continuous
process not amenable to strict stage definitions, some precise decision
about the length of time an in vitro embryo could be kept alive
and used for experimentation must be given. The committee decided on a
fourteen-day limit, because, as mentioned above, after fourteen days the
beginnings of a nervous system become visible. The report says that this
is a very conservative timeframe and that that conservatism was
desirable and warranted in this case. The report goes on to air concerns
over deliberately bringing embryos into existence for the purpose of
experimentations, since some members of the inquiry had significant
objections to the practice. However the report recommends that any
embryo resulting from in virto fertilization, within the
fourteen-day restriction, could be used for experimentation. 
Chapter twelve details some more speculative issues with respect to
scientific research. Particular attention is given to the issue of
trans-species fertilization. The report approves of trans-species
fertilization only as part of a research program into human infertility,
but it recommends that the embryo be terminated at the two-cell stage of
development. The report also discusses ectogenesis, the process of fully
developing a human embryo outside of a pregnant female, and
parthenogensis, or the development of an unfertilized human egg into an
embryo. The report says that both possibilities are unlikely and outside
of the scope of the inquiry. Cloning and nucleus substitution are
briefly considered in chapter twelve, as well as therapeutic embryonic
biopsies. The committee also discourages the use of embryos for drug
testing. Chapter Thirteen postulates the structure and functions
of a governmental organization that would have oversight and licensing
power over this area of medicine and science. The committee recommends
that the authority have two functions: one executive and one advisory.
The executive authority is to grant provider and researcher licenses,
and to provide oversight to practitioners. The advisory function is to
monitor changes in assisted reproductive technology and embryology and
to provide recommendations and information to the public and the
legislature when needed. This agency became the Human Fertilisation and
Embryology Authority, or HEFA, in 1991. Chapter thirteen also prohibits
the formation of an open free market for embryos and gametes. 
Following the thirteenth full chapter, the report gave five lists of
recommendations from the preceding text. The first of these lists,
Section A, enumerates recommendations concerning the licensing body and
its functions. The second list, Section B, concerns the principles of
provisions, including anonymity and counseling services for third party
donors. The third list, Section C, concerns service provisions, such as
funding through the NHS and organizational restructuring. The fourth
list, Section D, enumerates the recommendations concerning legal limits
on research. Finally Section E outlines all the suggests legal changes.
 Following the listed recommendations, there are appended three
expressions of dissent. The first dissent, signed by committee members
Wendy Greengross and David Davies, suggests that surrogacy should be
allowed and licensed by the new authority, contrary to the main
conclusion of the report on this matter detailed in chapter eight. The
second and third dissents are about the use of human embryos in
research. The first of these, dissent B, signed by committee members
Madeline Carriline, John Marshall, and Jean Walker, argue that nothing
be done to impede the implantation of a fertilized embryo. It further
argues that no experimentation on any human embryo ought to be
permitted. The final expression of dissent argues that human embryos
should not be created specifically for research, but that spare embryos
left over from normal IVF protocols could be used for experimentation
within the fourteen-day stipulation. This dissent was signed by
committee members Scott Baker, Anthony Dyson, N. Edwards, and Wendy
Greengross.  The Report of the Committee of Inquiry into Human
Fertilisation and Embryology of 1984 helped define the laws and
regulations in the UK concerning embryology and assisted reproductive
technology.  It is credited with the drafting of the Human Fertilisation
and Embryology Act of 1990, which established the Human Fertilisation
and Embryology Authority.  
 Sources Artificial Human
Insemination: The Report of a Commission Appointed by His Grace the
Archbishop of Canterbury. London, 1948. 
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990. Chapter 37 (Passed 1
November 1990). http://www.
legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1990/37/contents (Accessed September 13,
2014).
"The Warnock Report." Human Fertilisation & Embryology
Authority. http://www.hfea.gov.uk/2068.html
 (Accessed April 11, 2014).
Warnock, Mary. Chairman. Report of the Committee of Inquiry into
Human Fertilisation and Embryology. London: Her Majesty's Stationery
Office, 1984. http://www.hfea.gov.uk/docs/
Warnock_Report_of_the_Committee_of_Inquiry_into_Human_Fertilisation_and_
Embryology_1984.pdf (Accessed September 15, 2014).


How to cite
LaTourelle,
Jonathon J., "The Report of the 
Committee of Inquiry into Human Fertilisation and Embryology (1984), by 
Mary Warnock and the Committee of Inquiry into Human Fertilisation and
Embryology". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-10-02). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8208.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Saturday, November 1, 2014 - 20:11
 Topic
Subject
Insemenation, Artificial; Fertility; Warnock, Mary; Fertilization in vitro, Human; Reproductive technology; Embryo transplantation; Great Britain. Committee of Inquiry into
Human Fertilisation and Embryology; Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990; Literature