By Alexis Abboud
Published: 2014-11-04
Keywords: noninvasive genetic diagnosis, fetal DNA, maternal plasma
 Dennis Lo (1963- )Dennis Lo, also called Yuk Ming Dennis Lo, is a
	professor at the Chinese University of Hong Kong in Hong Kong,
	China. In 1997, Lo discovered fetal DNA in maternal
	plasma, which is the liquid component of a pregnant woman's
	blood. By 2002, Lo distinguished the DNA differences between pregnant women
	and their fetuses, enabling scientists to identify fetal DNA in pregnant
	women's blood. Lo used his discoveries to develop several
	non-invasive and prenatal genetic tests, including tests for blood
	group status and Trisomy 21, also called Down's Syndrome.
	Lo's discovery of fetal DNA in maternal plasma lessened the risks to pregnant women and fetuses during prenatal testing,  and it enabled  early
	identification of potential genetic mutations in developing
	fetuses.
Lo was born in 1963 in the Kowloon region of Hong Kong, then part
	of the British Commonwealth. Lo's father was former head of Qingsham
	Hospital, the oldest psychiatric hospital in Hong Kong. Lo's mother
	sang and taught music, instructing Lo and his brother Eric in piano,
	while their psychiatrist father encouraged the boys to cultivate
	talents that would help them with medical careers. Lo recalled
	spending his childhood reading National Geographic and
	developing his interests in photography and drawing.
Lo began school in the British school system in Hong Kong, but in
	his fifth year he passed an examination and transfered to St. Joseph's
	College, Hong Kong. After his time at St. Joseph's, Lo earned his
	undergraduate degree in preclinical medical training at the
	University of Cambridge in Cambridge, England, finishing the degree
	 in 1986. He then spent a year studying 
	cloning before moving to Oxford University in Oxford, England. At
	Oxford, Lo finished his PhD with Kenneth Fleming in 1994 and
	eventually became doctor of medicine in 2001. He worked in several
	jobs at Oxford for the next seven years. In 1997, Lo left Oxford to
	return to Hong Kong, which by that time had reverted to Chinese
	control.
While in England, Lo met fellow graduate
	student Alice Siu Ling Wong. Originally from Hong Kong, Alice was
	at Oxford University completing her doctorate in semi-conductor
	physics. Lo and Wong married while at Oxford.
During his time at Oxford in 1987, Lo hypothesized that
	polymerase chain reaction (PCR), a technique to amplify and discern
	small amounts of DNA, could be used to find fetal cells in maternal
	plasma. Lo spent ten years searching for these fetal cells before
	concluding that there were not enough fetal cells within the
	pregnant women's blood to detect differences between maternal and fetal DNA.
	However, Lo assumed that fetal DNA would
	only appear in fetal cells. Usually, DNA is only
	within a cell's nucleus, but it can sometimes leave the cell.
In 1996, the article "Microsatellite alterations in plasma DNA of
	small cell lung cancer patients," reported that Xu Qi Chen's research team at
	the University of Geneva in Geneva, Switzerland, 
	found tumor DNA in the plasma of patients with small cell lung
	cancer, a type of aggressive malignant lung cancer often associated
	with smoking. After reading the article, Lo hypothesized that if
	free-floating DNA from a small tumor could be detected in plasma,
	then perhaps free-floating DNA from a fetus could also be detected in plasma.
	Lo noted that one of the largest differences between maternal DNA and
	fetal DNA is when the fetus is male and has a Y-chromosome,
	Lo used PCR to detect Y-chromosomes from male fetuses in maternal
	blood. In his 1997 article "Presence of fetal DNA in maternal serum
	and plasma," Lo reported that he found male fetal DNA in
	maternal plasma outside of the confines of an intact fetal cell.
At first, Lo's discovery allowed only for prenatal sex type
	determination. Doctors could take a sample of the pregnant woman's blood and
	test it to determine the sex of her fetus. In 1998, Lo developed a
	test for the rhesus (Rh) blood group status of the fetus. The Rh
	blood group status, named after the rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta)
	in which the blood type was first identified, refers to antibodies found in
	blood. When a pregnant woman and her fetus have incompatible antibodies,
	often the woman's immune system perceives the pregnancy as foreign
	and harms the developing fetus. If doctors can determine whether the Rh blood
	group status of the pregnant woman and the fetus are compatible early in the
	pregnancy, then they can help to lessen that risk. In the article "Prenatal
	Diagnosis of Fetal RhD Status by Molecular Analysis of Maternal
	Plasma," Lo and his research team presented a method for determining
	blood group status through a non-invasive blood test.
Those first tests relied on genetic abnormalities passed from the sire to the fetus, because the sire's portion of the fetus's DNA was easier to
	distinguish from the pregnant woman's DNA. Even though fetal DNA comprises
	almost ten percent of maternal plasma
	during the first and second trimesters, it is still a small portion
	of an overall blood sample, often lost in the background of maternal
	DNA. For this reason, doctors more easily isolated the
	paternal part of fetal DNA from the overall maternal blood sample.
	Therefore, the first non-invasive prenatal genetic tests could only
	detect those genetic abnormalities inherited from the sire.
However, the differences in DNA methylation between pregnant women and
	fetuses offered researchers another way to differentiate fetal from maternal DNA. DNA methylation is a process in which a methyl group is added to some parts of a DNA sequence, affecting how that sequence produces proteins or other products. In a fetus, a large
	portion of DNA is methylated, as DNA methylation plays a large role
	in fetal development. In 2002, Leo Poon, Lo's associate at the
	University of Hong Kong, along with Lo and several other
	researchers, used the DNA methylation differences between a pregnant woman
	and her fetus to isolate fetal DNA within the woman's blood. This technique for
	non-invasive prenatal genetic diagnosis is called maternal plasma
	fetal DNA recovery.
In 2003, the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
	in Hong Kong interrupted Lo's work on non-invasive prenatal genetic
	testing. His laboratory, along with several others in Hong Kong,
	sequenced the SARS virus to use this sequence to develop and treat
	the disease. In 2007, Lo and his team designed a non-invasive maternal blood
	test to determine whether or not a fetus has Down's syndrome, a genetic
	defect caused by the presence of an extra copy of chromosome 21 in
	the nuclei of the fetus's cells.
Compared to Lo's non-invasive testing techniques,
	amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling are both invasive
	prenatal genetic testing techniques, which require a breach of the
	womb that can expose the fetus to potential harms and, in some
	scenarios, result in spontaneous abortions. Amniocentesis requires
	doctors to test the amniotic fluid from inside the placenta. The
	breakage of the placental barrier causes spontaneous abortion in two
	to three of every 1,000 pregnancies, a 0.3 percent increase in risk
	compared to women who do not undergo amniocentesis. Chorionic villus
	sampling, the sampling of the tissue surrounding the fetus, causes
	spontaneous abortion approximately 3.6 percent of the time, an
	increase in risk of 0.8 percent compared to mothers who undergo
	non-invasive testing. With Lo's discovery, pregnant women could
	learn about potential genetic mutation of their fetuses in a way
	that lessened the risk of spontaneous abortion.
In 2005, in recognition of his scientific work, the State Council
	of China awarded Lo the State Natural Science Award. A year later,
	Lo received the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and
	Laboratory Medicine (IFCC) Abbott Award for Outstanding Contribution
	to Molecular Diagnostics, and the US National Academy of Clinical
	Biochemistry Distinguished Scientist Award. In 2009, Lo received a
	Fulbright Distinguished Scholar Award. In 2011, he was elected
	Fellow of the Royal Society and named Foreign Associate of the US
	National Academy of Sciences in 2013.
As of 2014, Lo teaches medicine and chemical pathology at the
	Chinese University of Hong Kong, where he develops more prenatal
	genetic tests.


 Sources Andrews, Lori
		B., Maxwell J. Mehlman, and Mark A. Rothstein. Genetics: Ethics,
		Law and Policy. St. Paul: Thomas Reuters, 2010.
Bogdanović,
		Ozren and José Luis Gómez-Skarmeta. "Embryonic DNA methylation:
		insights from the genomics era." Briefings in Functional
		Genomics 12 (2013): 1–10.
		
Chachkin,
		Carolyn Jacobs. "What Potent Blood: Non-Invasive Prenatal
		Genetic Diagnosis and the Transformation of Modern Prenatal
		Care." American Journal of Law and Medicine 33 (2007): 9–53.
Chen, Xu Qi, Maurice Stroun, Jean-Luc Magnenat, Laurent P.
		Nicod, Anne-Marie Kurt, Jacqueline Lyautey, Christine Lederrey,
		and Phillipe Anker. "Microsatellite alterations in plasma DNA of
		small cell lung cancer patients." National Medicine 2 (1996):
		1033–5.
Chim, Stephen S.C., Shengnan Jin, Tracy Y.H. Lee, Fiona M.F. Lun, Wing S. Lee, Lisa Y.S. Chan, Yongjie Jin et al. "Systematic search for placental DNA-methylation markers on chromosome 21: toward a maternal plasma-based epigenetic test for fetal trisomy 21." Clinical Chemistry 54  (2008): 500–511. http://www.clinchem.org/content/54/3/500.long (Accessed November 2, 2014).
Chinese University of Hong Kong Communications and
		Public Relations Office. "Professor Dennis Lo Yuk-ming." Chinese
		University of Hong Kong.
		http://www.cpr.cuhk.edu.hk/resources/press/pdf/070328DLoCV_e.pdf
		(Accessed September 24, 2013).
Chiu, Rossa W.K., K.C. Allen Chan, Yuan Gao, Virginia Y.M. Lau, Wenli Zheng, Tak Y. Leung, Chris H.F. Foo et al. "Noninvasive prenatal diagnosis of fetal chromosomal aneuploidy by massively parallel genomic sequencing of DNA in maternal plasma." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105 (2008): 20458–63. http://www.pnas.org/content/105/51/20458.long (Accessed November 2, 2014).
Department of Chemical Pathology.
		"Dennis Lo." The Chinese University of Hong Kong.
		http://www.cpy.cuhk.edu.hk/Research/DennisLo.htm (Accessed
		September 15, 2013).
Landau, Misia. "Yuk Ming Dennis Lo."
		Clinical Chemistry 58 (2012): 784–6.
Lo, Yuk Ming Dennis. "Fetal DNA in maternal plasma: biology and diagnostic applications." Clinical Chemistry 46 (2000): 1903–06. http://www.clinchem.org/content/46/12/1903.full (Accessed November 2, 2014).
Lo, Yuk Ming Dennis. "Non-invasive
		prenatal diagnosis by massively parallel sequencing of maternal
		plasma DNA." Open Biology 2 (2012): 1–5.
		http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3390796/ (Accessed
		September 15, 2013).
Lo, Yuk Ming Dennis. Survey Responses with Embryo Project Encyclopedia Editors, August 2014.
Lo, Yuk Ming Dennis, Noemi
		Corbetta, Paul F. Chamberlain, Vik Rai, Ian L. Sargent,
		Christopher W.G. Redman, and James S. Wainscoat. "Presence of
		fetal DNA in maternal plasma and serum." The Lancet 350 (1997):
		485–7.
Lo, Yuk Ming Dennis, N. Magnus Hjelm, Carrie Fidler, Ian
		L. Sargent, Michael F. Murphy, Paul F. Chamberlain, Priscilla
		M.K. Poon, Christoper W.G. Redman, and James S. Wainscoat.
		"Prenatal diagnosis of fetal RhD status by molecular analysis of
		maternal plasma." New England Journal of Medicine 339 (1998):
		1734–8.
Lo, Yuk Ming Dennis, and Rossa W.K. Chiu. "Prenatal diagnosis: progress through plasma nucleic acids." Nature Reviews Genetics 8 (2006): 71–77.
Lo, Yuk Ming Dennis, Fiona M.F. Lun, K.C. Allen Chan,
		Nancy B.Y. Tsui, Ka C. Chong, Tze K. Lau, Tak Y. Leung, Benny
		C.Y. Zee, Charles R. Cantor, and Rossa W.K. Chiu.  "Digital PCR
		for the molecular detection of fetal chromosomal aneuploidy."
		Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
		States 104 (2007): 13116–21. http://www.pnas.org/content/104/32/13116.full (Accessed November 2, 2014). 
Lo, Yuk Ming Dennis, K.C. Allen Chan, Hao Sun, Eric Z. Chen, Peiyong Jiang, Fiona M.F. Lun, Yama W. Zheng et al. "Maternal plasma DNA sequencing reveals the genome-wide genetic and mutational profile of the fetus." Science Translational Medicine 2 (2010): 61ra91.
Lun, Fiona M.F., Rossa W.K. Chiu, K.C. Allen Chan, Tak Yeung Leung, Tze Kin Lau, and Yuk Ming Dennis Lo. "Microfluidics digital PCR reveals a higher than expected fraction of fetal DNA in maternal plasma." Clinical Chemistry 54  (2008): 1664–1672. http://www.clinchem.org/content/54/10/1664.full (Accessed November 2, 2014). 
Ng, Enders K.O., David S. Hui, K.C. Allen Chan, Emily C.W. Hung, Rossa W.K. Chiu, Nelson Lee, Alan Wu et al. "Quantitative analysis and prognostic implication of SARS coronavirus RNA in the plasma and serum of patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome." Clinical Chemistry 49  (2003): 1976–80. http://www.clinchem.org/content/49/12/1976.long (Accessed November 2, 2014).
Poon, Leo L.M., Tse N. Leung, Tze K. Lau,
		Catherine C.K. Chow, and Yuk-Ming Dennis Lo. "Differential DNA
		Methylation between Fetus and Mother as a Strategy for Detecting
		Fetal DNA in Maternal Plasma." Clinical Chemistry 48 (2002):
		35–41. http://www.clinchem.org/content/48/1/35.full (Accessed November 2, 2014). 

How to cite
Abboud, Alexis, "Dennis Lo (1963- )". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-11-04). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8233.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Wednesday, November 5, 2014 - 01:20
 Topic
Subject
Prenatal Screening; Lo, Y. M. Dennis; Blood testing; Genetic testing; Genetic diagnosis; Prenatal diagnosis; Prenatal testing; Amniocentesis; Chorionic villus sampling; Obstetrics; Chinese University of Hong Kong; People