By Valerie Racine
Published: 2014-08-19
Keywords: Pasteur Institute, phage group
 The Pasteur Institute (1887- )L'Institut Pasteur (The Pasteur Institute) is a non-profit
	private research institution founded by Louis Pasteur on 4 June 1887
	in Paris, France. The Institute's research focuses on the
	study of infectious diseases, micro-organisms, viruses, and
	vaccines. As of 2014, ten scientists have received Nobel Prizes in
	physiology or medicine for the research they have done at the
	Pasteur Institute. Contrary to the way genetics was studied in US
	research universities during the mid-twentieth century, the genetic
	research conducted at the Pasteur Institute at the same time did not
	rest on a conceptual separation between embryology and evolution.
	According to historian Michel Morange from the École Normale
	Supérieure in Paris, France, this difference enabled Pasteurian
	scientists to develop the concepts of regulatory genes and of developmental genes.
Louis Pasteur served as
	the Institute's first director until his death on 28 September 1895.
	Pasteur researched bacteria, contributed to the germ theory
	of disease, and developed methods of sterilization aimed at reducing
	pathogens in food, a process eventually called
	pasteurization. Pasteur also developed a vaccine to control and
	treat rabies, and he administered it to humans for the first time in
	1885 at the École Normale Supérieure (hereafter called École
	Normale). During the following years, the Académie des Sciences in
	Paris, France, as well as other public contributors, funded Pasteur
	to establish an institute to provide rabies vaccinations, to study
	infectious diseases, and to disseminate this information throughout
	France and the rest of the world. Pasteur recruited a team of
	scientists from several nations with diverse scientific backgrounds
	to work in the laboratories of the Pasteur Institute.
The
	first scientists who served as directors of the first five
	departments at the Institute were Émile Duclaux, Charles
	Chamberland, Ilya Mechnikov, Jacques-Joseph Grancher, and Émile
	Roux. All five departments focused on research in
	microbiology, despite the varied scientific disciplines represented
	by the directors of the departments.
Émile Duclaux, who lived
	from 1840 to 1904, was a chemist and microbiologist, and he had studied
	with Pasteur at the École Normale. He had assisted Pasteur in his
	efforts to refute the theory of spontaneous generation, according to
	which living organisms could emerge from non-living matter. At the
	time of the founding of the Institute, Duclaux helped establish the
	journal Les Annales de l'Institut Pasteur (the Annals of the
	Pasteur Institute), which focused on the current research in
	microbiology and pathology. Duclaux later succeeded Pasteur as the
	Institute's director in 1895.
Like Duclaux, Charles Chamberland, who lived fro 1851 to 1908,
	was also a graduate from the École Normale, where he studied
	physical sciences. After his graduation, Chamberland worked as
	curator in Pasteur's laboratory at the École Normale. Also like
	Duclaux, Chamberland contributed to Pasteur's refutation of the
	theory of spontaneous generation by noting flaws in the experimental
	protocols of those who wanted to invalidate Pasteur's work.
Before coming to the Pasteur Institute, Ilya Mechnikov, who lived
	from 1845 to 1916, was a professor of zoology and comparative
	anatomy at the University of Odessa, in Odessa, in what later became
	Ukraine. In 1886, Mechnikov administrated Pasteur's rabies
	vaccinations in Odessa but, as he was not a medical doctor, he
	encountered resistance from the local community. Two years later he
	visited Pasteur in Paris to ask for advice on his situation in
	Odessa. Pasteur appointed Mechnikov as director of a department and
	laboratory in the Pasteur Institute. Mechnikov worked at the
	Institute for the rest of his life and won the Nobel Prize in
	Physiology or Medicine in 1908 for his work on the immune system. He
	helped discover phagocytes, which are immune cells that protect the body by
	ingesting foreign particles or microorganisms, and he developed a
	theory of the cellular process involving phagocytes, called
	phagocytosis.
Jacques-Joseph Grancher, who lived from 1843 to
	1907, and Émile Roux, who lived from 1853 to 1933, were both medical
	doctors. Grancher had worked with Pasteur on the rabies vaccination
	and continued to work on a treatment for tuberculosis at the Pasteur
	Institute. In 1883, Roux succeeded  Duclaux as director of the Pasteur Institute, and he helped develop a treatment for diphtheria, an
	infectious disease caused by the bacteria Corynebacterium
	diphtheria that affects the respiratory system. Roux offered
	one of the first courses on microbiology, called Cours de
	Microbie Technique (Course on Microbe Research Technique), at
	the Pasteur Institute in 1889. François Jacob, who lived from 1920
	to 2013, a scientist who joined the Pasteur Institute in 1950,
	described Roux as an austere man who had a monastic devotion to
	Pasteur and the Institute.
The Pasteur Institute continued
	its research into preventative medicine into the twentieth century.
	During the first half of that century, scientists determined the
	viral and bacterial causes of many diseases, including the plague,
	malaria, typhus, diphtheria, tuberculosis, tetanus, yellow fever,
	poliomyelitis, and hepatitis B. Researchers working at the Pasteur
	Institute also developed treatments and vaccines to counteract the
	effects of those diseases on populations.
Pasteur chose particular scientists to direct the Institute's
	departments, which led to a tradition of recruiting a certain type
	of researcher. The typical Pasteurian scientist had a scientific or
	medical background and no affiliation with any other official
	academic institution. The recruits were assigned either a topic to
	study or a problem to solve in a particular department or
	laboratory. Jacob later described the Pasteur Institute as the first
	center of interdisciplinary research, which made use of the
	diversity of its workforce to focus on specific problems from a
	variety of angles.
The Pasteur Institute emphasized basic
	research and practical applications. Those aims enabled the Pasteur
	Institute to get support from industry, such as pharmaceutical
	firms, throughout most of its existence because it could provide
	marketable products to those firms.
The Pasteur Institute
	created a global network with satellite institutions in greater than
	thirty countries, based on the same organizing principles of the
	original institute in Paris. This network originally addressed
	medical problems in developing countries. Albert Calmette, a military doctor who lived
	from 1863 to 1933, was the first Pasteurian to
	establish an oversees branch, which he organized in 1891 in Ho Chi
	Minh City, then called Saigon, in Vietnam. There, Calmette worked on
	the development of smallpox and rabies vaccines to treat infected
	Vietnamese. Calmette treated about 500,000 people who had travelled
	to his center from across south east Asia to receive the vaccines.
	Calmette later worked on the development of an anti-venom
	serotherapy to treat bites from venomous cobras. The Pasteur
	Institute continued to establish satellite institutes throughout
	southern Asia, the Mediterranean, the Caribbean, and the African
	continent, enabling the organization to continue its study of
	tropical diseases.
After the Second World War, the Pasteur
	Institute focused on research in molecular biology. This endeavour
	began in 1951 when André Lwoff, who lived from 1902 to 1994,
	discovered the existence of proviruses, viral genomes that are
	integrated in the genetic material of host cells, such as bacteria.
	This discovery influenced many scientists at the Pasteur Institute
	to re-orient their research towards the study of bacterial cells,
	with a focus on the molecular basis for the functions and syntheses
	of those cells. This research program, triggered by André Lwoff's
	discovery, culminated in the achievement of the Nobel Prize in
	Physiology or Medicine in 1965.
The prize was awarded to
	François Jacob, to Jacques Monod, who lived from 1910 to 1976, and to
	André Lwoff, for their model of genetic regulation. Jacob and Monod
	proposed this model in their 1961 paper, "Genetic Regulatory
	Mechanisms in the Synthesis of Proteins." In this paper, they
	explained how regulatory proteins control cellular processes by
	acting as on/off switches for gene expression. Jacob and Monod
	expected that their model of regulation could provide a framework
	for understanding the process of cell differentiation during
	development.
The Pasteurian team of the 1950s, 60s, and 70s
	comprised of Lwoff, Monod, Jacob, Elie
	Wollman, who lived from 1917 to 2008, François Gros, born in 1925,
	and Jean-Pierre Changeux, born in 1936, helped establish a French
	tradition of molecular genetics, as some historians called it, in
	the second half of the twentieth century. Many Pasteurian
	biologists, including Lwoff, refused to adopt or dispel then current
	theories of heredity, a position that enabled scientists at the
	Pasteur Institute to pursue a variety of different research projects
	without regard to any specific theory. According to Jacob, this
	atmosphere within the Pasteur Institute's labs encouraged scientists
	to work on less studied organisms, such as lysogenic bacteria, which
	led to the discovery of the mechanisms involved in gene expression.
	Subsequently, Jacob and Monod's model of gene expression and
	regulation provided a conceptual basis for a research program in
	which molecular biologists attempted to describe the complex
	processes involved in embryonic development.
The Pasteur Institute faced financial
	difficulties between the 1930s and the 1970s because of its poorly
	managed commercial and industrial activities. The Pasteur
	Institute's financial difficulties began to change in 1971, when
	Monod became director of that institution. By 1974, Monod and his
	team had acquired public subsidies for half of its operating budget,
	as well as a number of private donations, to ensure the Pasteur
	Institute's continued existence as a private and independent
	research center. During this time, the Pasteur Institute built new
	infrastructure and new research departments.
In 1983, almost
	a century after its inauguration, researchers at the Pasteur
	Institute isolated and identified the human immunodeficiency virus
	(HIV), the virus that causes AIDS (acquired immune deficiency
	syndrome). Two decades later, researchers Luc Montagnier, born in
	1932, and Françoise Barré-Sinoussi, born in 1947, from the Pasteur
	Institute shared the 2008 Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine for
	this discovery.
At the beginning of the twenty-first century,
	the Pasteur Institute had international network of research centers.
	From its original location, it developed ten major research centers,
	a teaching center to train graduate and postgraduate students, and
	an epidemiological reference center to identify and monitor
	different strains of bacterial and viral outbreaks found across the
	world. The Institute also includes the Musée Pasteur (Pasteur
	Museum) located in the institution's original 1888 building. This
	building houses an archive containing documents of Pasteur's life
	and work, as well as Pasteur's tomb.
As a non-profit private
	organization, the Pasteur Institute is governed by an independent
	board of governors, which, as of 2014, is chaired by François
	Ailleret, born in 1937, who oversees the institution's finances. The
	Institute receives funds from a variety of sources, including the
	French government, consulting fees, licensing royalties, contract
	revenues, and other private contributions. The distribution of
	investors enabled the Pasteur Institute to maintain its founder's
	original vision of an autonomous research center structured in a way
	that enables its scientists to pursue both basic research and
	practical applications in biology. 
 Sources Barré-Sinoussi,
		Françoise, Jean-Claude Chermann, Fran Rey, Marie Thérèse
		Nugeyre, Sophie Chamaret, Jacqueline Gruest, Charles Dauguet,
		and Luc Montagnier. "Isolation of a T-lymphotropic retrovirus
		from a patient at risk for acquired immune deficiency syndrome
		(AIDS)." Science (1983): 868–71.
Chamberland, Charles. Rôle des microbes dans la
		production des maladie (Microbes' Role in Diseases'
		Production.) Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1882. http://gallica.
		bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k58372790.r=R%C3%B4le+des+
		microbes+dans+la+production+des+maladie.langEN (Accessed
		April 7 2014). 
Duclaux, Émile. L'hygiène sociale (Social Hygiene).
		Paris: F. Alcan, 1902. 
		https://archive.org/details/lhyginesociale01duclgoog/ 
		(Accessed 9 April 2014).
Gascar, Pierre. Du côté de chez Monsieur Pasteur. (At
		the side of Mr. Pasteur.) Paris: Éditions Odile Jacob,
		1986.
Grancher, Jacques-Joseph. Prophylaxie de la tuberculose:
		rapport lu au nom de la Commission de la tubercolose
		(Tuberculosis Prophylaxis: Report to the Committee for
		Tuberculosis). Paris: Masson, 1898.
Jacob, François. The Statue Within: An Autobiography.
		New York: Basic Books, 1988.
Jacob, François. "The Pasteur Institute."
		Nobelprize.org, 1998. http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine
		/ articles/jacob/ (Accessed February 23, 2013.)
Jacob, François, and Élie L. Wollman. La sexualité des
		bactéries. (Sexuality of Bacteria.) Paris: Librairies de
		L'Académie de Médecine, 1959.
Jacob, François, and Jacques Monod. "Gènes de structure et
		gènes de regulation dans la 	biosynthèse des proteins."
		(Genes of Structure and Genes of Regulation in the Biosynthesis
		of Proteins.) Comptes rendus hebdomadaires des séances de
		l'Académie des sciences (Weekly Reports of the Meetings of the Academy of Sciences) 249 (1959): 1282–4.
Jacob, François, and Jacques Monod. "Genetic Regulatory
		Mechanisms in the Synthesis of 	Proteins." Journal of
		Molecular Biology 3 (1961): 318–56.
Lwoff, André. "Lysogeny." Bacteriology Review 17
		(1953): 269–337. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC180777/ (Accessed August 18, 2014).
Metchnikoff, Élie. Immunity in Infectious Disease.
		Trans. Francis G. Binnie. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
		1907. http://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=ien.
		35558005390543;seq=7; view=1up;num=iii (Accessed April 9,
		2014.) 
Morange, Michel. "French Tradition and the rise of
		Evo-devo." Theory in Biosciences 126 (2007): 149–53.
Moulin, Anne-Marie. "Patriarchal Science: The Network of the
		Overseas Pasteur Institutes."	Science and Empires,
		eds. Patrick Petitjean, Catherine Jami, and Anne-Marie Moulin,
		307–322. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1992.
Pasteur, Louis. La théorie des germes et ses applications
		à la médecine et à la chirurgie: Lecture faite à l'Académie de
		la Médecine (A Theory on Germs and its Applications on
		Medicine and Surgery: Lecture at the Academy of Medicine.)
		Paris: G. Masson, 1878. http://utmb.contentdm.oclc.org/cdm/compoundobject/collection/p16721coll1/id/133 (Accessed April 9, 2014.)
		
Peyrieras, Nadine, and Michel Morange. "The study of
		lysogeny at the Pasteur Institute (1950–1960): an
		epistemologically open system." Studies in the History and
		Philosophy of 	Biological and Biomedical Sciences 33
		(2002): 419–30.
Reynolds, Moira D. How Pasteur Changed History: The Story
		of Louis Pasteur and the Pasteur Institute. Bradenton,
		Florida: McGuinn & McGuire Pub., 1994.
Roux, Émile. Étude sur les calculs de l'urèthre
		(Study on Urethra Stones.) Paris: Société d'éditions
		scientifiques, 1894.
The Pasteur Foundation. "Remembrance of Things Pasteur:
		Pasteur Institutes USA." http://
		www.pasteurfoundation.org/institutes.shtml (Accessed
		February 23, 2013.)  

How to cite
Racine, Valerie, "The Pasteur Institute (1887- )". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-08-19). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8151.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Tuesday, August 19, 2014 - 22:33
 Topic
Subject
 Pasteur, Louis, 1822-1895; Pasteur Institute (Paris, France); Bacteria; Genetic regulation; Operons; Molecular genetics; Genetics; Duclaux, Emile, 1840-1904; Chamberland, Ch., 1851-; Metchnikoff, Elie, 1845-1916; Calmette, A. (Albert), 1863-1933; Vaccines; Lwoff, Andr , 1902-; Jacob, Fran ois, 1920-2013; Monod, Jacques; Montagnier, Luc; HIV (Viruses); Organization