By Dorothy Haskett
Published: 2014-11-22
Keywords: Chromosomal Theory of Heredity
 Theophilus Shickel
Painter (1889-1969)Theophilus Shickel Painter studied the structure and
	function of chromosomes in the US during in the early to mid-twentieth century. Painter worked at
	the University of Texas at Austin in Austin, Texas. In the 1920s
	and 1930s, Painter studied the chromosomes of the salivary gland
	giant chromosomes of the fruit fly (Drosophila
	melanogaster), with Hermann J. Muller. Muller and Painter
	studied the ability of X-rays to cause changes in the chromosomes
	of fruit flies. Painter also studied chromosomes in mammals.
	He investigated the development of the male gamete, a process
	called spermatogenesis, in several invertebrates and vertebrates,
	including mammals. In addition, Painter studied the role the
	Y-chromosome plays in the determination and development of the male
	embryo. Painter's research concluded that egg cells joined with a
	sperm cell bearing an X-chromosome resulted in a female embryo,
	whereas egg cells joined with a sperm cell carrying a
	Y-chromosome resulted in a male embryo. Painter's work with
	chromosomes helped other researchers determine that X- and
	Y-chromosomes are responsible for sex determination.
Painter was born on 22 August 1889 in Salem, Virginia, to Laura
	T. Shickel Painter and Franklin V. N. Painter, a clergyman and
	educator.  Most of Painter's elementary and secondary education
	occurred at home, as he was often sick. In 1904, Painter
	enrolled at Roanoke College in Salem, Virginia, where his father was
	a professor of modern languages and English literature. Roanoke was
	a small college and had few science classes. At Roanoke, Painter
	studied chemistry and physics with no exposure to biology, and he
	graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1908.
After graduation in 1908, Painter received a scholarship to
	study chemistry and entered Yale University in New Haven,
	Connecticut, as a graduate student. In Lorande L.
	Woodruff's lab at Yale, Painter studied
	microscopic life in hay infused with pond water. The hay infusion was Painter's first exposure to
	biological studies, which he then pursued in his subsequent academic
	career. Painter finished his chemistry studies and received a
	Master's of Arts in chemistry in 1909, but he changed his field from
	chemistry to zoology for his doctorate.
Still at Yale for his doctorate, Painter studied with his supervisor Ross G. Harrison, who developed methods to grow
	embryonic cells in tissue culture, and with Alexander Petrunkevich,
	who studied spiders. For his doctorate, Painter focused on the
	spermatogenesis of the jumping spider (Maevia
	vittata).  After receiving his PhD in 1913, Painter studied
	with Theodor Boveri, who developed the chromosome theory of
	inheritance, at the University of Würzburg in Würzburg, Germany, and
	at the Marine Zoological Station at Naples (Stazione Zoologica
	Anton Dohrn di Napoli) in Naples, Italy. In Naples he studied
	the process of cell division or cleavage of developing sea urchin
	(Echinus
	melo) eggs.
Painter returned to Yale as an instructor of zoology from 1914 to
	1916, and in the summers, he taught a course on invertebrate zoology
	at the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, Massachusetts. At
	Woods Hole, Painter met Anna M. Thomas from Philadelphia,
	Pennsylvania, a student in one of his classes at Woods Hole in 1914,
	whom he married on 19 December 1917, and with whom he had four
	children. In Woods Hole, Painter also met the head of the Zoology
	Department at the University of Texas at Austin, John T. Patterson,
	who offered him an academic position.  In 1916, Painter accepted the
	position at the University of Texas at Austin, where he worked with
	Patterson for the rest of his academic career.
Painter served in the US National Guard in New Haven,
	Connecticut, until September 1916. He then went to Austin to teach
	zoology, but military service interrupted his research. With the
	onset of World War I, the US Army Signal Corps commissioned Painter
	as a first lieutenant in 1917 and sent him to Toronto's Imperial
	Flying School in Toronto, Canada. Painter returned to Austin to
	establish a ground school of aviation in Austin, Texas. He then
	served as a member of the academic board of the Austin Academy of
	Aviation in Austin, Texas. In April 1919, Painter retired as a captain
	in the Reserve Corps.
After the war, Painter returned to the University of Texas at
	Austin and resumed research and teaching. In 1921 Painter became an
	associate professor and he advanced to full professor in 1925. After
	military service, Painter resumed spermatogenesis studies, this time
	in vertebrate animals like the common lizard (Anolis
	carolinensis), rather than in invertebrates like the sea
	urchin. Embryologist Carl G. Hartmann in the zoology department at
	the University of Texas at Austin studied the reproduction of the
	opossum (Didelphis
	virginiana), which offered an opportunity for Painter to
	switch from studying the chromosomes of spiders, marine organisms,
	and lizards, to mammalian chromosomes.
In the 1920s, not many scientists had studied mammalian
	chromosomes. Scientists assumed that mammals had sex chromosomes
	that corresponded to the chromosomes of insects, where XX was female
	and XZ was male, but there was no evidence for this
	assumption. Cytological studies, at that time, used tissues that had
	first been fixed in alcohol or formaldehyde, embedded in paraffin,
	sectioned, and stained with a dye to show the internal structure of
	cells. Because the opossum's Y-chromosome was so small, the
	scientific community thought that the male opossum lacked a
	Y-chromosome and had an XO chromosome type, in which 'O' represented the
	absence of a chromosome or the null type.  Painter invented a knife
	with multiple blades by mounting multiple safety razor blades in
	parallel to cut up the testis into thin sections immediately after
	the organ removal. His technique improved the stabilization of the
	tissue, called fixation, and enabled a more detailed view of the
	cell structure. Painter used that technique to show that the male
	opossum had a small Y-chromosome that paired with the female's
	X-chromosome. In 1921, Painter published "The Y-chromosome in
	Mammals," in which he described the XY chromosome type in the male
	opossum. He confirmed that both the male and female opossums had
	twenty-two chromosomes.
Painter studied the sex chromosomes of humans in 1923, and sex
	chromosomes of the primates brown cebus (Cebus capucinus)
	and rhesus monkey (Rhesus macacus)
	in 1924. In those studies, Painter confirmed the XX female and the
	XY male sex chromosome in both human and primates. The number of
	chromosomes in humans was unclear at the time of Painter's research,
	as scientists reported the number to be from forty-six to
	forty-eight, with most investigators reporting forty-eight human
	chromosomes. In 1923, Painter reported forty-eight on evidence of
	what he called his best cell, or the best section from human testes,
	perpetuating an error that lasted until the 1950s. In 1956 Joe H.
	Tijio and Albert Levan at the Institute of Genetics in Lund, Sweden,
	confirmed that the actual number was forty-six chromosomes for
	humans.
Genes located close together on a chromosome are often inherited
	together and are called linked genes. Geneticists used breading
	experiments to calculate how often traits were inherited together to
	determine how far apart genes were on a chromosome. From the
	breeding crossover frequencies, geneticists built linkage maps or
	genetic maps to determine the structure of the chromosomes. In the
	1920s and 1930s, geneticists hypothesized that genes lined up on the
	chromosome in a linear fashion, and they used breeding crossover
	frequencies to determine the relative distance between genes.
	Painter studied the structure and function of chromosomes by
	observing stained chromosomes under the microscope. Painter
	correlated cell changes with the breeding crossover data. Natural
	changes, or mutations, in the genes or chromosome were rare. It took
	many breeding experiments to observe a change in the expression of
	the chromosomes. In 1927, Muller published "Artificial Transmutation
	of the Gene" describing the change that X-rays induced in the fruit
	fly genes, for which he later won the Nobel Prize.
At the University of Texas at Austin, Painter and Muller
	collaborated on the study of the parallel behavior of genes and
	chromosomes. They correlated linkage maps for fruit flies with data about how fruit fly chromosomes rearranged themselves in cells after the researchers had irradiated them with X-rays. In
	1929, Painter and Muller co-authored two articles, "Parallel
	Cytology and Genetics of Induced Translocations and Deletions in
	Drosophila" and "The Cytological Expression of Changes in Gene
	Alignment Produced by X-rays in Drosophila," which criticized
	theories of the point-by-point correspondence of linkage maps and
	the structure of chromosomes. The chromosomes had long areas where
	no crossovers occurred and other shorter areas where many crossovers
	occurred.
From 1929 to 1939, Painter published at least fourteen articles
	on the giant chromosomes of the fruit fly (D. melanogaster)
	larvae's salivary gland. Painter co-authored several of these papers
	with colleagues including Muller and Patterson. In 1939, Painter
	became distinguished professor of zoology at the University of Texas
	at Austin.
In the 1950s, new techniques became available to count
	chromosomes more accurately. New stains such as Feulgen and Giemsa stains,
	which specifically stained DNA, became available. In 1952, Tao-Chiuh
	Hsu at the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston, Texas,
	developed a technique for preparing and counting chromosomes. Hsu
	grew embryonic cells in tissue cultures for several days, treated
	them with colchicine, a chemical that stops cell division at the 
	metaphase stage, then rinsed them in a hypotonic salt solution before
	fixing and staining them. In 1956, Tijio and Levan used Hsu's technique
	to determine that the number of human chromosomes was forty-six
	rather than forty-eight. In the 1980s, Hsu, at the University of
	Texas's M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Huston, Texas, reexamined
	some of the original preparations, according to which Painter based
	his erroneous chromosome count. According to Painter's biographer
	Glass, Hsu found chromosomes that stuck together or clumped, and
	chromosomes cut into segments by the microtome knife, which made it
	hard to find any cells that could yield a clear chromosome count.
In 1944, Painter became president of the University of Texas at
	Austin, a position he held until 1952. After being in an
	administrative position for eight years, Painter returned to
	scientific research and teaching. In 1966, Painter retired from
	 teaching, but kept active in research and committees.
In 1934, the US National Academy of Sciences awarded Painter the
	Daniel Giraud Elliot Medal for his work on the chromosomes in Drosophila's
	salivary glands. Painter was elected to The Scientific
	Research Society, Sigma Xi, in 1934. Painter was a member of the
	American Philosophical Society, the American Society of Naturalists,
	the American Society of Anatomists, and the American Society of
	Zoologists, which he served as president in 1940. In 1969, Painter
	received the first M.D. Anderson Award for Scientific Creativity and
	Teaching from the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Hospital and
	Tumor Institute in Houston, Texas.
Painter died at the age of eighty on 5 October 1969, after
	returning home from a hunting trip, in Fort Stockton, Texas. Two of
	his papers, the 1969 "The Origin of Nucleic Acid Bases Found in the
	Royal Jelly of the Honeybee" and the 1971 "Chromosomes and Genes
	Viewed from a Perspective of Fifty Years," appeared after his death.
	
 Sources Allen, Garland
		E. "Painter, Theophilus Shuckel." Complete Dictionary of
		Scientific Biography 10 (2008): 276–7.
Biesele, John Julius, Herbert Flake Poyner, and Theophilus
		Shickel Painter. Nuclear Phenomena in Mouse Cancers. Austin:
		University of Texas, 1942.
Biesele, John Julius, Robert Philip Wagner, and Clarence
		Paul Oliver. "Theophilus Shuckel Painter." The University of
		Texas at Austin. http://www.utexas.edu/faculty/council/2000-2001/memorials/SCANNED/painter.pdf (Accessed November 21,
		2013).
Glass, Bentley. "Theophilus Shuckel Painter 1889–1969: A
		Biographical Memoir." Biographical Memoir 59 (1990):
		307–337. Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Science, 1990. http://www.nasonline.org/publications/biographical-memoirs/memoir-pdfs/painter-theophilus-shickel.pdf  (Accessed November 21,
		2014).
Hsu, Tao-Chiu, "Mammalian Chromosomes In Vitro: I. The
		Karyotype of Man." The Journal of Heredity 43 (1952):
		167–72.
Muller, Hermann J., and Theophilus Shickel Painter. "The
		Cytological Expression of Changes in the Gene Alignment Produced
		by X-Rays in Drosophila." The American Naturalist 63
		(1929): 193–200. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2456940 (Accessed November 21, 2014).
Painter, Theophilus Shickel. "A guide to the Theophilus S.
		Painter Papers (1883–1983): Biographical Note."  Repository:
		Dolph Briscoe Center for American History, The University of
		Texas at Austin. http://www.lib.utexas.edu/taro/utcah/00961/cah-00961.html
		(Accessed August 30, 2013).
"Painter, Theophilus Shickel." Handbook of Texas
		Online. Published by the Texas State Historical Association.
		
		http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/fpa10
		(Accessed August 30, 2013).
Painter, Theophilus Shickel. "The Y-chromosome in Mammals."
		Science 53 (1921): 503–4.
Painter, Theophilus Shickel. "Studies in Mammalian
		Spermatogenesis." Journal of Experimental Zoology 37
		(1923): 291–336.
Painter, Theophilus Shickel. "Further Observations on the
		Sex Chromosomes of Mammals." Science 58 (1923):
		247–8.
Painter, Theophilus Shickel. "A comparative study of the chromosomes of mammals." American Naturalist (1925): 385–409. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2456360 (Accessed November 21, 2014).
Painter, Theophilus Shickel. "A new method for the study of
		chromosome aberrations and the plotting of chromosome maps in
		Drosophila melanogaster." Genetics 19 (1934): 175. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1208478/pdf/175.pdf
Painter, Theophilus Shickel. "On the synthesis of cleavage chromosomes."
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 26 (1940): 95–100. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1078011/pdf/pnas01613-0001.pdf (Accessed November 20, 2014). 
Painter, Theophilus Shickel. "The Origin of the Nucleic Acid Bases
Found in the Royal Jelly of the Honeybee." Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science 64 (1969): 64–6. http://www.pnas.org/content/64/1/64.full.pdf (Accessed November 20, 2014).
Painter, Theophilus Shickel. "Chromosomes and genes viewed from a perspective of fifty years of research." In Stadler Genetics Symposia. Columbia, Mo.: University of Missouri, Agricultural Experiment Station, 1971.
Painter, Theophilus Shickel and Hermann J. Muller. "Parallel
		Cytology and Genetics of Deletions in Drosophila." Journal of Heredity 20 (1929): 287–298.
Painter, Theophilus S., and Elizabeth C. Reindorp. "Endomitosis in
the nurse cells of the ovary of Drosophila melanogaster." Zeitschrift
für Zellforschung und Mikroskopische Anatomie Abt. B Chromosoma [Journal of Cell Research and Microscopic Anatomy Part B: Chromosoms] 1
(1939): 276–83.
Tjio, Joe Hin and Albert Levan. "The Chromosome Number of Man."
Hereditas 42 (1956): 1–6.  

How to cite
Haskett, Dorothy, "Theophilus Shickel
Painter (1889-1969)". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-11-22). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8242.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Sunday, November 23, 2014 - 03:28
 Topic
Subject
 Painter, Theophilus S. (Theophilus Shickel), 1889-1969; Chromosomes; Karyotypes; Sex chromosomes; Genetics; Linkage (Genetics); Human chromosomes; Y chromosome; X chromosome; Human genetics; Sex determination, Genetic; Muller, Herman J.; Opossums; University of Texas at Austin; Drosophila; X-rays; Heredity; mutations; People