By M. Elizabeth Barnes
Published: 2014-07-11
Keywords: recapitulation theory, von Baer's Laws
 The Origin of Species, "Chapter Thirteen: Mutual Affinities of Organic Beings: Morphology: Embryology: Rudimentary Organs" (1859), by Charles R. Darwin"Mutual Affinities of Organic Beings: Morphology:
	Embryology: Rudimentary Organs" is the thirteenth chapter of Charles
	Darwin's book The Origin of Species, first published in
	England in 1859. The book details part of Darwin's argument for the common
	ancestry of life and natural selection as the cause of speciation.
	In this chapter, Darwin summarizes the evidence for evolution by
	connecting observations of development in organisms to the processes
	of natural selection. Darwin shows how the theory of special
	creation, which claims that God directly created all organisms in
	their current form, is inferior to the theory of natural selection
	for its ability to explain the diversity of life. In this chapter,
	Darwin also discusses classification and homology as they relate to
	natural selection.
On the Origin of Species by Means of
	Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the
	Struggle for Life was published by John Murray III of the John
	Murray publishing house in London, England, on 24 November 1859. At
	that time, Darwin lived in Kent, England. Since the first edition,
	five subsequent editions appeared, and the title of the book endured
	slight variations. The sixth and final edition, published on 19
	February 1872, appeared with the shortened title The Origin of
	Species.
Chapter thirteen is part of a group of chapters
	in which Darwin shows how natural selection can explain facts from
	several different fields of biology. In chapters nine through
	twelve, Darwin details facts from geology, archeology, and
	biogeography. In chapter thirteen, he discusses the fields of
	classification, morphology, and embryology. Darwin claims that the
	theory of evolution by natural selection can explain many phenomena,
	including the patterns emerging from the classification of
	organisms, the tendency of embryos to look similar to each other and
	then diverge from each other as their development progresses, and
	the presence of useless or vestigial organs. Furthermore, Darwin
	says that the alternative theory of special creation has less
	 explanatory power over these observations.
The
	first section of chapter thirteen discusses the classification of
	organisms. Darwin argues that classifying organisms gives a clue
	about their ancestry and relationships to each other. He explains
	how biologists organize species into groups according to the
	characters of organisms within species. These groups are then put into broader groups according
	to their more general characters. This process continues until there
	is just one group. For example, dogs belong to a group called canines, but they
	also belong to a larger and more general group called Carnivora.
	Additionally, they belong to an even more general group called
	mammals, which belongs to the group of vertebrates. This process creates a descending
	pattern from the largest most general groups to the smallest most
	distinct groups, a system Carl Linné developed in the eighteenth
	century in Sweden.
Darwin then ties these classifications to his theory of evolution by natural selection. He notes
	that individuals of the same species vary from each other.
	Additionally, he says that these individuals will compete with each
	other for resources and, because of their variations, different
	individuals may be able to exploit slightly different resources.
	Through the pressures of natural selection those organisms will
	diverge into separate populations throughout many generations.
	Like the different groups within classification, these now separate
	populations will vary from each other in their specialized
	characters, and yet retain the general
	characteristics of the larger original population. According to
	Darwin, the patterns emerging from classification parallel the
	process of speciation.
Next, Darwin argues that the
	processes by which biologists classify species rely on common
	ancestry rather than on special creation. He argues that, if God
	uniquely created organisms, then biologists should classify organisms according to the type of habitats the organisms live
	in or according to all external similarities between organisms. But, Darwin says,  biologists don't in fact classify organisms with those principles.  For instance, biologists do not classify large
	fish with whales even though they share very similar external
	characters and habitats. When looking at organisms through the scope
	of common ancestry, however, biologists can explain why they don't
	classify whales and fish together. Whales and fishes look similar
	because both of their ancestors have been put under the same
	pressure to survive and reproduce in an aquatic habitat, but in
	their basic parts they are very different. For example, whales
	breathe air and give birth to live young, while fishes extract
	oxygen from the water and lay eggs.
In the next section,
	labeled "Morphology," Darwin discusses the unity of life on earth.
	He calls upon homology of basic structures as evidence of evolution
	from a common ancestor. Darwin defines homologies as structures that
	seem to be of the same type across very different groups of animals,
	even though they may differ from each other in their forms or in how they function. He
	notes the similarities in bone structures between the limbs of
	organisms across different genera of animals used for different
	purposes, such as the hands of humans used for grasping, the
	wings of birds used for flight, and the paddles of porpoises used
	for swimming. The limbs are made of the same basic components:
	similar bones, in a similar order, from a similar pattern. According
	to Darwin, this phenomenon indicates a shared ancestor whose
	original body-plan has been modified over time, and supports the
	claim that species have not been uniquely created.
The third
	section of chapter thirteen, "Embryology," is about developmental
	processes and phenomena. He notes that embryos from different classes of animals,
	such as birds and mammals, look very similar to one another in early
	development. He tells a story about Louis Agassiz, a biologist who
	was at Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Agassiz, upon
	receiving new specimens of embryos, forgot to put a label on one
	embryo. Later, when returning to the embryos he could not tell if
	the unlabeled embryo was a bird, a mammal, or a reptile because they all
	looked so remarkably similar. Historians later argued that Darwin
	mistakenly attributed the story to Agassiz, and that Darwin meant to
	name Karl von Baer, an embryologist at Königsberg University, in
	Königsberg, Germany, who developed von Baer's Laws of development in
	the early half of the nineteenth century.
Darwin then
	discusses how similarities between embryos of different species can
	 persist in later stages of development, and even after birth. As an
	example, he talks about how many species of cats have stripes and
	spots. Lions lack these characters as adults, but the stripes and
	spots are still present in newborn lion cubs. This observation leads
	Darwin to argue that the time when variation occurs during cats'
	development can differ across species.
Whether or not differentiation of
	organisms occurs in early or in late development, Darwin says that
	offspring will develop traits in the same developmental stages that
	their parents developed those traits. He supports his claim with
	examples of hereditary diseases. Darwin notes that an
	inherited disease will generally develop in the offspring at the
	same age it afflicted the parent. Darwin uses this observation to
	support his hypothesis of heritable variation.
Darwin next
	discusses one reason why embryos of animals from very different species look so
	similar to each other. He states that the stages of development when
	embryos look similar to each other are also the stages in which
	embryos generally do not interact with the outside environment. At
	these stages, embryos are largely dependent on their mother's wombs
	or on the egg, and they hardly interact with the outside
	environment. Darwin says that differentiation between embryos of
	different species will occur increasingly as the organisms are
	exposed to the outside environment and as they become more
	independent. The increasing divergence of embryos is because natural
	selection occurs during the time when organisms are interacting with
	their outside environment. Embryos of different species look similar
	because they share a common ancestor, and because they do not have to face
	as much selective pressure as adult organisms do. It is the adults that are subjected to their environment the most, and
	therefore selected.
According to Darwin, natural selection
	also explains a theory in developmental biology that says that the stages in
	an organism's development parallel the adult forms of other animals
	that were its ancestors. According to this theory, called recapitulation theory, the stage at
	which human embryos exhibit gill slits parallels the adult forms of
	our fish ancestor species. This theory came from the observation
	that embryos exhibit stages in development in which they resemble
	the adult forms of other animals. Darwin tried to explain these
	phenomena with the theory of natural selection. He explains that,
	although the results of natural selection enable researchers to
	conclude that animals replay their ancestry during development, the
	hypothesis of recapitulation is an exaggeration of the truth.
	Embryology can indicate evolutionary relationships between groups of
	organisms only because embryos have undergone less change than
	adults. Thus, biologists can see those structures that are similar
	between species at early stages of development. However, Darwin
	argues that not every stage of development corresponds to the form
	of its adult ancestor.
The last section of this chapter,
	labeled "Rudimentary Organs" addresses the vestigial structures in
	animals, and it shows that only natural selection can account for
	these features. Darwin defines vestigial structures as structures
	that persist within a species but have lost their function. They are usually
	smaller than their homologues in other species, and are sometimes
	described as atrophied. However, Darwin's definition differs from
	the definition of vestigial structures used by later biologists.
Throughout chapter thirteen, Darwin cites examples to support his
	conclusions on vestigial organs. One of those examples includes the
	remnants of legs on snakes. Snakes do not use legs to move, yet
	some of them possess structures similar to legs; they are in the
	same location as the legs of other species, and they are composed of the
	same basic parts, although smaller. Naturalists correlated the
	rudimentary legs of snakes and the functional legs of lizards.
Darwin uses these examples to critique the theory of creationism.
	Darwin asks: why would individually and uniquely created species
	have useless structures? Darwin says that, if we accept creationism
	to explain the origin of species, then we must accept that there is no
	rational explanation for these parts. In contrast, natural selection
	explains those phenomena. Organisms possess vestigial structures
	because they have an ancestor that also possessed these structures.
	Those structures in descendent species adapted for different
	functions, or disappeared due to selective environmental pressures,
	which their ancestors did not experience.
Darwin's
	embryological arguments for evolution influenced the study of the
	relationships between evolution and development. For example, after
	the publication of The Origin, Ernst Haeckel in Jena,
	Germany, used Darwin's arguments in support of his biogenetic law or
	recapitulation, which stated that organisms replay their
	evolutionary ancestry while developing from embryos to adults. Many
	biologists accepted Haeckel's biogenetic law until the 1890s. 
 Sources Baer, Karl Ernst von. Über Entwickelungsgeschichte der Thiere. Beobachtung und reflexion. [On the Developmental History of the Animals. Observations and Reflections]. Königsberg: Gebrüdern Bornträger 1828. http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/28306 (Accessed April, 12 2014).
Bowler, Peter J.
		Evolution: The History of an Idea. Berkeley and Los
		Angeles: University of California Press, 1984.
Costa,
		James T. The Annotated Origin. Cambridge: Harvard
		University Press, 2009.
Darwin, Charles R. On the Origin of Species by Means of
		Natural Selection, or the Preservation Of Favoured Races in the
		Struggle for Life. London: John Murray Publishing House,
		1859. http://darwin-online.org.uk/content/
		frameset?pageseq=1&itemID= F373&viewtype=text
		(Accessed March 6, 2014).
Linnaeus, Carl. Systema Naturae [System of Nature], 12th edition. Holmiae: Laurentii Salvii, 1766–68. http://dx.doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.68927 (Accessed January 14, 2014).
Gould, Stephen J. Ontogeny
		and Phylogeny. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1977.
		
Haeckel, Ernst. Generelle morphologie der organismen. [General Morphology of the Organisms]. Berlin: G. Reimer, 1866. http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/22319#page/11/mode/1up (Accessed April 12, 2014).


How to cite
Barnes, M. Elizabeth, "The Origin of Species: "Chapter Thirteen: Mutual Affinities of Organic Beings: Morphology: Embryology: Rudimentary Organs" (1859), by Charles R. Darwin". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-07-11). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8033.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Tuesday, July 15, 2014 - 19:20
 Topic
Subject
 Darwin, Charles, 1809-1882; Darwin, Charles, 1809-1882. On the origin of species; Evolution; Origin of species; Natural selection; Baer, Karl Ernst von, 1792-1876; Embryology; Literature