By Paige Madison
Published: 2015-02-02
Keywords: hominin, Dikika, Anthropology, Evolution
 The Discovery of The
Dikika Baby Fossil as Evidence for Australopithecine Growth and
DevelopmentWhen scientists discovered a 3.3 million-year-old skeleton
	of a child of the human lineage (hominin) in 2000, in the village of
	Hadar, Ethiopia, they were able to study growth and development of
	Australopithecus
	afarensis, an extinct hominin species. The team of
	researchers, led by Zeresenay Alemseged of the Max Planck Institute
	for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, Germany, named the fossil
	DIK 1-1 and nicknamed it Dikika baby after the Dikika research site.
	The Dikika fossil preserves much of the skull, including the jaw and
	teeth, which enabled scientists to study the teeth microstructures
	and to reconstruct the pace at which individuals of the hominin
	A. afarensis developed.
Researchers study fossils of juvenile hominins because those
	fossils illustrate the slow rate at which humans grow. One of the
	ways humans differ from their closest living relatives, chimpanzees
	and gorillas, is by their comparatively long childhood period, or
	period before they acquire the ability to reproduce. Researchers can
	study this extended childhood through the microstructures of teeth,
	which preserve the timing of when humans pass through stages such as
	weaning and tooth eruption. Scientists can reconstruct the life
	histories of human ancestors to learn when the evolution of the
	extended childhood appeared in the hominin lineage.
 Alemseged recovered the partially exposed fossil in December
	2000 from a block of sandstone within the Hadar Formation at a site
	called Dikika, located in northern Ethiopia. Part of the
	fossil´s face was exposed from the three-million-year-old
	strata, whereas the majority of the specimen´s skull remained
	surrounded by rock. Alemseged spent five years removing the solid
	material surrounding the fossil, material called matrix, to expose
	the complete fossil. In addition to the braincase and face, the
	Dikika baby fossil includes elements such as the shoulder blades and
	several vertebrae. When much of the fossil had been exposed,
	Alemseged and his coauthors published the discovery in a 2006
	article titled "A Juvenile Early Hominin Skeleton from Dikika,
	Ethiopia."
In this publication, Alemseged´s team argued that the
	Dikika baby was especially useful for explaining the growth patterns
	of fossil hominin because the specimen included both the head and
	parts of the body (crania and post-crania). The discovery of many
	A. afarensis fossils enabled scientists to identify the
	Dikika baby as a member of that species. The Dikika fossil often
	referred to as Selam, or Lucy´s baby, referring to the
	specimen of A. afarensis, discovered in Hadar in 1974, called
	Lucy. The Dikika baby was the first relatively complete A.
	afarensis juvenile studied in detail. The authors claimed that
	Dikika was the first non-Neanderthal juvenile hominin preserved
	enough to study in order to explain A. afarensis
	development.
In the 2006 article, Alemseged and his team noted that their
	findings of the teeth led them to claim that the Dikika baby was
	around three years old. They first noted that the baby teeth, or
	milk teeth (deciduous teeth), were all erupted. They then used
	computer-processed X-rays to produce virtual images or slices of a
	specific area of a scanned object, called computed tomography (CT)
	scan, which revealed that the first molar crowns were not erupted
	but were fully formed.
The research team also noted the presence of unerupted teeth
	 such as the canine and incisor crowns, which appeared to be at
	 differing stages of development. The scientists then examined the
	 microstructures of the erupted deciduous teeth, based on the
	 methods of Timothy Bromage of the University of Toronto in Toronto,
	 Canada, and of Christopher Dean of the University College London in
	 London, UK. Those methods  count striations on the surface of the
	 tooth crowns, which form the molars, in order to estimate growth
	 periods. Then, following the work of Bromage and Dean, Alemsefad
	 and his team compared these dental developmental stages to a model
	 of African ape molar formation. Bromage and Dean demonstrated that
	 hominins likely had shorter growth periods than humans. They based
	 their estimates on African apes, which develop faster than
	 humans.
In addition to providing information on hominin growth and
	development, the Dikika fossil raised questions about behavior and
	possible arboreal habits in Australopithecines. In 2002,
	Alemseged, along with David J. Green from Midwestern University in
	Downers Grove, Illinois published an article titled
	"Australopithecus afarensis Scapular Ontogeny, Function,
	and the Role of Climbing in Human Evolution." They argued that
	the preserved shoulder blades, or scapulae, of the Dikika baby
	indicated that members of the species spent a lot of time climbing.
	This result contributed to a debate on how much time
	Australopithecines spent climbing versus walking. Based on
	the Dikika baby shoulder blades, some scientists suggested that
	Australopithecines may have climbed in trees to forage or to
	make nests to sleep. 
In the early decades of the twenty-first century, the Dikika baby
	was the oldest hominin fossil found that provided information on
	early hominin growth and development. It provided a detailed example
	of tooth development in a juvenile. In addition to fossils that
	approach Homo sapiens more closely, such as Homo erectus
	and Homo
	neanderthalensis, this fossil helps scientist to reconstruct
	the evolution of humans´ extended developmental period.
 Sources Alemseged, Zeresenay, Fred Spoor, William H. Kimbel,
		René Bobe, Denis Geraads, Denné Reed, and Jonathan
		G. Wynn. "A Juvenile Early Hominin Skeleton from Dikika,
		Ethiopia." Nature 443 (2006): 296–301.
Bromage, Timothy G., and M. Christopher Dean,
		"Re-evaluation of the Age at Death of Immature Fossil
		Hominids." Nature 317 (1985): 525–7.
Dean, Christopher, Maeve G. Leakey, Donald Reid, Friedemann
		Schrenk, Gary T. Schwartz, Christopher Stringer, and Alan
		Walker. "Growth Processes in Teeth Distinguish Modern Human
		from Homo erectus and Earlier Hominins." Nature 414
		(2001): 628–31.
Green, David J., and Zeresenay Alemseged.
		"Australopithecus afarensis Scapular Ontogeny, Function,
		and the Role of Climbing in Human Evolution."
		Science 338 (2012): 514–7.
 Kelley, Jay, and Gary T. Schwartz. "Life-history
		Inference in the Early Hominins Australopithecus and
		Paranthropus." International Journal of Primatology
		33 (2012): 1332–63. 
Wynn, Jonathan G., Zeresenay Alemseged, René Bobe,
		Denis Geraads, Denné Reed, and Diana C. Roman.
		"Geological and Palaeontological Context of a Pliocene
		Juvenile Hominin at Dikika, Ethiopia." Nature 443
		(2006): 332–6. 

How to cite
Madison, Paige, "The Discovery of The Dikika Baby Fossil as Evidence for Australopithecine Growth and Development". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2015-02-02). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8286.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Friday, February 6, 2015 - 01:38
 Topic
Subject
Anthropology, Physical; Fossils; Paleontology; Biological
Evolution; Tomography
Scanners, X-Ray Computed; Age
Determination by Teeth; Paleodontology; Fossil
hominids; Human remains (Archaeology); Prehistoric peoples; Antiquities, Prehistoric; Excavations
(Archaeology); Archeology; Concept