By Ceara O'Brien
Published: 2014-02-18
Keywords: human stem cell research
 The US President's Council on Bioethics (2001-2009) The US President's Council on Bioethics was an organization headquartered in Washington
	D.C. that was chartered to advise then US President George W. Bush on ethical issues related to
  biomedical science and technology.    In November 2001, US President
	George W. Bush created the President's Council on Bioethics (PCB). Convened during a nationwide cloning and
	embryonic stem cell research debate, the Council stated that it worked to address arguments about
	ethics from many different perspectives. The organization enacted a model for analyzing
	bioethical issues through deliberation instead of through the consensus approach. US President Barack Obama replaced the PCB in 2009 with his
	Presidential Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues.
On 9 August, 2001, US President Bush gave a national television address in which he announced
	his administration's stance on the federal funding of human embryonic stem cell (ESC) research.
	Bush stated that he would allow federal funding for what he claimed were more than sixty
	existing ESC lines and that he would restrict federal funding for the creation of new ESC lines. He stated that his position would allow ESC research while remaining sensitive to the citizens who claimed that embryos are morally
	significant. Near the end of his speech, Bush proposed the creation of a council to examine the
	ethical concerns surrounding stem cell research and recommend stem cell research guidelines. The
	President's Council on Bioethics officially commenced three months later through presidential
	executive order 13237.
As head commissioner of the President's Council on
	Bioethics, Bush nominated Leon Kass, a professor at the University of Chicago in Chicago, Illinois and the author
	of several books about biological research. Prior to his appointment, in the 1997 article, "The Wisdom of Repugnance," Kass
	argued against the legalization of technology that could lead to cloning, and
	he discussed moral and ethical consequences of cloning technology. In a New York Times profile
	published a month before the first meeting of the President's Council, Kass remarked on the need
	to have discussions about science that addressed not only how biotechnologies work, but also
	what they mean for humanity. 
 Kass nominated the other seventeen members of the PCB, all of whom were subsequently
	approved by Bush. Members came from a wide range of disciplines including law,
	political theory, biology, medicine, moral philosophy, metaphysics, and religious ethics. Most
	members were professors and several members were practicing physicians. Kass said that he
	did not want the council to be composed entirely of professional bioethicists. Rather, he said
	that he selected members based on their ability to think deeply about complicated issues. Many
	opponents of the Bush Administration's new embryonic stem cell policy argued that most members
	held conservative views. Defenders of the PCB noted that at least half of the
	members had publicly supported the creation of stem cell lines from embryos.
The President's Council on Bioethics continued a tradition of presidential bioethics
	commissions assembled in the 1970s to address issues posed by new biotechnologies. Some
	commentators said that PCB differed extensively from previous advisory boards in its methods of
	addressing bioethics issues. The executive order that created the PCB stated that while the
	council's purpose was to advise the president, the organization should not be guided by the need
	to develop consensus positions on the issues. In comparison, the previous bioethics commission
	under President William J. Clinton had crafted unanimous consensus statements and policy
	recommendations for embryonic stem cell research funding.
 The PCB said that its primary mission was to develop a comprehensive awareness of the issues
	and to provide a forum for national discussion. Kass opened PCB's first meeting in January 2002
	with a reading of Nathaniel Hawthorne's 1846 story "The Birthmark," in which a scientist becomes
	obsessed with eradicating a small blemish on his wife's cheek, the only flaw detracting from her
	extraordinary beauty. In the end, the scientist's quest for perfection eliminates the birthmark
	but kills the wife. Kass connected the meaning of the story to the council's prospective
	examination of the possible consequences resulting from humanity's use of biotechnologies.  Some
	commentators praised the council's humanistic exploration, while critics bemoaned that policy
	recommendations regarding stem cell research were going to be based on literature and
	aesthetics, and not on facts.
The council discussed the ethics of human cloning and experimentation on cloned human embryos
	from January through July 2002. Even though President Bush had already created and implemented
	his embryonic stem cell research policy, the consequences of cloning remained contentious amongst
	scientists, policy makers, and the public. 
 Two types of human cloning are called reproductive cloning and therapeutic cloning. In
	reproductive cloning, a nucleus from a non-reproductive cell is inserted by scientists into a
	reproductive cell that has had its own nucleus removed. The mid 1990s cloning of Dolly the sheep is an
	example of reproductive cloning.
Similarly, in therapeutic cloning, a nucleus from a non-reproductive cell is inserted by
	scientists into a reproductive cell that lacks a nucleus. However, the process differs in
	purpose. Scientists use therapeutic cloning to create and harvest stem cells, terminating the
	development of the embryo within fourteen days of transferring the nucleus. Many scientists
	argue that cloned stem cells may provide treatments for many diseases, including Parkinson's,
	Alzheimer's, juvenile diabetes, and spinal-cord paralysis.
 Previous US presidential bioethics organizations discussed and produced reports on human
	cloning. While previous reports focused on formulating policy and law recommendations, the PCB
	focused on different aspects of the human cloning debate in its report Human Cloning and Human
	Dignity, published in July 2002. The council's report reviewed ethical arguments for and
	against reproductive and therapeutic cloning.
 The policy recommendations presented in Human Cloning and Human Dignity, provoked
	reactions within and beyond the scientific community. PBC unanimously recommended a total ban on
	reproductive cloning. However it was divided on therapeutic cloning. Some council members argued
	that the possibility of future medical treatments enabled by the cloning of embryos merited
	approval for therapeutic cloning. Other members argued that the destruction of embryos was
	morally impermissible in this context, and thus voted for a total ban of therapeutic cloning.
	The report ultimately recommended a four-year national moratorium on therapeutic cloning. The
	recommended temporary ban applied to all institutions and researchers in the US, regardless of
	whether or not they used federal funding. 
 Simultaneously, during the first half of 2002, the PCB discussed reproductive and
	therapeutic cloning, while the US National Academy of Sciences in Washington, D.C.  issued a
	report that called for a ban on reproductive cloning but reaffirmed its support for research on
	therapeutic cloning. The National Academy of Sciences is research organization
	whose members advise the US government on scientific matters. Many biomedical scientists supported the
	National Academy of Sciences's position, and they argued that the two different kinds of
	cloning, therapeutic and reproductive, were incorrectly conflated in the public's mind. That year three
	leaders of the biomedical research community—Bruce Alberts, the president of the National
	Academy of Sciences, Kenneth Shine, president of the Institute of Medicine, and Bert Vogelstein,
	chairman of the National Research Council, all headquartered in Washington, D.C.—published an
	article titled "Please Don't Call It Cloning!" The authors requested that public policy
	officials use proper scientific terminology when discussing the different types of cloning in
	order to more accurately distinguish between embryos cloned for research purposes and embryos
	cloned with the intent of growing people. The article recommended that policy officials stop
	using the term therapeutic cloning, and instead call the technique nuclear transplantation. 
The President's Council on Bioethics addressed terminology when discussing the types of
	cloning in Human Cloning and Dignity. In a chapter dedicated to terminology, the council
	stated that policy makers should aim for both accuracy and fairness when phrasing contentious
	issues because the choice of names can shape the way questions are posed and determine how
	answers are given. However, the PCB disagreed with the statements made by scientists that policy
	makers should use more scientific terms such as nuclear transplantation. Instead, the report
	claims that the most accurate and fair terminology to describe the two types of cloning
	are cloning-to-produce-children and cloning-for-biomedical-research. 
Other organizations also disagreed with PCB's recommendations. Anti-abortion organizations
	were not satisfied that the PCB recommended a moratorium instead of a ban on ESC research. The American Life
	League, an anti-abortion organization headquartered in Stafford, Virginia, published a statement in which they claimed that
	Bush had failed to uphold his commitment to anti-abortion policies. 
Kass argued that journalists concentrated all of their attention on the political
	implications of the report instead of on the reasons that supported the recommendations. To avoid
	future criticism, Kass restructured subsequent reports published by the President's Council to
	describe opposing moral positions on issues connected with biotechnology and to offer few policy
	recommendations from council members. In October 2003, the council published Beyond Therapy:
	Biotechnology and the Pursuit of Happiness, which the authors described as an ethical inquiry
	about the purposes and motivations underlying biomedical science. 
Kass's claim that the most important task of a public bioethics council was to provide a
	forum for robust national deliberation continued to shape the council's proceedings. In
	December 2003 the council published Being Human: Readings from The President's Council on
	Bioethics, an anthology of history, philosophy, religious text, and literature. The
	organization's web site archived the transcripts of all the Council's meetings; records of
	deliberations that several bioethicists labeled as models of vigorous and civil philosophical
	disagreement. 
 In 2005 Kass stepped down as head commissioner but remained a member of the council under
	the leadership of Edmund Pellegrino. Pellegrino was Professor of Medicine and Medical Ethics and
	professor of Philosophy at Georgetown University, in Washington D.C. Pellegrino shared many of
	Kass's core values and remained head commissioner until the council was dissolved four years
	later. From September 2005 through December 2008 the council published two reports on
	end-of-life care, one report on newborn genetic screening, and a collection of essays titled
	Human Dignity and Bioethics. 
 The Council's work on end-of-life care and newborn genetic screening sparked less debate
	than did their publications about embryonic stem cells. The Challenging Moral Focus of Newborn
	Screening, published in December 2008, argues against the expansion of mandatory newborn
	screening for genetic diseases for which no treatments exist.
The PCB's recommendations ran counter to the position of major professional organizations,
	like the American Academy of Pediatrics, headquartered in Elk Grove Village, Illinois, which
	endorsed the use of new screening technologies for the early detection of genetic conditions
	even when no known treatment exists. In March 2008, The President's Council compiled an
	anthology of essays written by council members and guest authors titled Human Dignity and
	Bioethics, which aimed to describe various meanings of the term human dignity – a phrase
	invoked frequently in many of the Council's reports. The preface to Human Dignity and
	Bioethics asserted that the collection of essays was an educational resource for the public,
	similar to the Council's first anthology published in 2003. The contributing authors of Human
	Dignity and Bioethics argued that assorted conceptions of dignity can be grounded in
	reflections on the possible consequences of biotechnologies. 
Ruth Macklin, a professor of medical ethics at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York, New York, and Harvard University professor Steven Pinker in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
	 published responses to the PCB's use of the term dignity. They advocated 
	that the government—including presidential bioethics commissions—should take a hands-off
	approach about the moral implications of biomedical research and consider only the safety of
	biotechnologies, leaving the more personal questions to the public. 
Bush's term as US President ended in 2008, and Barack Obama was elected as the next US president. In 2009,  Obama's administration dissolved the President's
	Council on Bioethics two weeks before its charter was set to expire. The letter terminating the
	members' appointments explained that Obama valued an advisory commission that was
	objective and non-ideological. A White House press officer explained to the media that the new
	president would appoint a commission with a mandate to provide practical policy options. On 24
	November 2009, President Obama signed Executive Order 13521, establishing the Presidential
	Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues led by Amy Gutmann, president of the University of
	Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Some commentators praised the Bush's President's Council on Bioethics for its willingness to ask
	what they called essential questions about what it means to be human and how humanity's
	fundamental values might be affected by specific uses of innovative biotechnology. Other
	commentators, including many members of the bioethicist community, declared the PCB a failed
	experiment because it did not construct practical policy recommendations. The disagreement about
	the PCB's methods prompted many to question the purpose of bioethics advisory boards at the
	political level, especially when addressing morally contentious issues like embryonic stem cell
	research. 
 Sources American Life League. "Broken Promises: How the Compromise of President Bush on Embryonic Stem Cell Research and
Human Cloning Has Damaged the Pro-life Movement. A White Paper." (August 2002).
http://www.all.org/article/index/id/MjM2MA
(Accessed October 10, 2013). 
Beauchamp, Tom L., and James F. Childress. Principles of Biomedical Ethics. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2001.
Belluck, Pam. "Seeking to Balance Values of Science and Humanity." The New York Times
August 11, 2001. http://www.nytimes.com/2001/08/11/politics/11KASS.html (Accessed February 10, 2014).
Bush, George W. Executive Order 13237: Creation of the President's Council on Bioethics. November 30, 2001. 66 FR 59851. https://federalregister.gov/a/01-29948 (Accessed February 10, 2014).
Charo, Alta R. "Passing on the Right: Conservative Bioethics is Closer Than It Appears."
Journal of Law, Medicine and Ethics 32 (2004): 307–14. 
Green, Ronald M. "The President's Council on Bioethics." Journal of Religious Ethics 38
(2010): 197–218.
Hadley, Caroline. "Science Policy in the USA." European Molecular Biology Organization 5
(2004): 932–5. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1299162/ (Accessed February 10, 2014).
Hawthorne, Nathaniel. "The Birthmark." In his Mosses from and Old Manse. New York: Wiley and Putnam, 1846. 
http://bioethics.georgetown.edu/pcbe/background/birthmark.html 
 (Accessed October 13, 2013). 
Kass, Leon R. "The Wisdom of Repugnance." The New Republic 216 (1997): 17.
Kaveny, Cathleen M. "Rhetoric, Public Reason and Bioethics: The President's Council on Bioethics
and Human Cloning. Journal of Law and Politics 20 (2004): 489–577.
Macklin, Ruth. "Dignity is a useless concept." British Medical Journal (Clinical Research
Education) 327 (2003): 1419–20. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC300789/?report=classic (Accessed February 10, 2014).
Mitcham, Carl E. "President's Council on Bioethics." Encyclopedia of Science, Technology, and
Ethics 3 (2005): 1482–6.
Obama, Barack H.  Executive Order 13521: Establishing the Presidential Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues. November 24, 2009. 74 FR 62671. https://federalregister.gov/a/E9-28805
  (Accessed February 10, 2014). 
Pinker, Steven. 2008. The stupidity of dignity. Human Life Review 34 (2008): 75. xxx (Accessed October 10, 2013.) 
President's Council on Bioethics. "Transcript of the first meeting, January 17, 2002." Washington D.C., 2002. 
https://bioethicsarchive.georgetown.edu/pcbe/transcripts/jan02/jan17session1.html
(Accessed February 10, 2013).
President's Council on Bioethics. Human Cloning and Human Dignity: An Ethical Inquiry. Washington D.C., 2002. http://bioethics.georgetown.edu/pcbe/reports/cloningreport/
(Accessed May 5, 2012). 
President's Council on Bioethics. Being human: Readings from the President's
Council on Bioethics. Washington, D.C., 2003. https://bioethicsarchive.georgetown.edu/pcbe/bookshelf/ (Accessed February 14, 2014).
President's Council on Bioethics. Beyond therapy: Biotechnology
and the Pursuit of Happiness. Washington D.C., 2003. https://bioethicsarchive.georgetown.edu/pcbe/reports/beyondtherapy/ (Accessed February 10, 2014).
President's Council on Bioethics. Monitoring Stem Cell Research. Washington D.C., 2004. http://bioethics.georgetown.edu/pcbe/reports/stemcell/ 	
(Accessed May 5, 2012).
President's Council on Bioethics. The Changing Moral Focus of Newborn Screening: An
Ethical Analysis by the President's Council on Bioethics. Washington, D.C., 2008. https://bioethicsarchive.georgetown.edu/pcbe/reports/newborn_screening/ (Accessed February 10, 2014). 
President's Council on Bioethics. Human Dignity and Bioethics: Essays Commissioned by the
President's Council on Bioethics. Washington D.C., 2008. 
https://bioethicsarchive.georgetown.edu/pcbe/reports/human_dignity/ (Accessed August 10, 2012).
Tollefsen, Christopher. "The President's Council on Bioethics: Overview and Assessment."
Health Care Ethics Committee Forum 18 (2006): 99–107.
Turner, Leigh. "Science, Politics, and the President's Council on Bioethics." Nature
	Biotechnology 22 (2004): 509–10. http://www.nature.com/nbt/journal/v22/n5/full/nbt0504-509.html (Accessed February 10, 2014). 
Vogelstein, Bert, Bruce Alberts, and Kenneth Shrine. "Please Don't Call It Cloning!"
Science 295 (2002): 1237.
Wade, Nicholas. "Obama Plans to Replace Bush's Bioethics Panel." The New York Times June
17, 2009. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/06/18/us/politics/18ethics.html?_r=0 (Accessed February 10, 2014).


How to cite
O'Brien, Ceara, "The US President's Council on Bioethics (2001-2009)". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-02-18). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/7560.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Tuesday, December 16, 2014 - 21:52
 Topic
Subject
Embryo, Mammalian; Biomedical Ethics; Bioethics; Advisory boards; Stem cells; Bush, George W. (George Walker), 1946-; President's Council on Bioethics (U.S.); embryonic stem cells; United States. Presidential Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues; Executive orders; Kass, Leon; Embryos; Human cloning; Human cloning--Moral and ethical aspects; Cell nuclei--Transplantation; Pellegrino, Edmund D., 1920-2013; Gutmann, Amy; Obama, Barack; Organization