By Katherine Brind'Amour, Benjamin Garcia
Published: 2007-11-11
Keywords: Catholicism, Popes, Abortion, Fetus
 Pope Innocent XIPope Innocent XI, born Benedetto Odescalchi, made considerable contributions to the 
		Roman Catholic approach to 
		embryology by condemning several propositions on liberal moral theology in 1679, including two related to 
		abortion and 
		ensoulment.  His rejection of these principles strengthened the 
		Church’s stance against 
		abortion and for the idea of “hominization,” meaning the presence of human qualities before birth.  
He was born 19 May in 1611 in Como, Italy, and began his studies under the Jesuits at Como before studying jurisprudence at both Naples and Rome.  Pope Urban VIII named him prothonotary, president of the Apostolic Camera, commissary at Ancona, administrator of Macerata, and governor of Picena in succession.  Shortly thereafter he was appointed cardinal-deacon of Santi Cosma e Damiano in 1645 before being named cardinal-priest of Sant’ Onofrio by Pope Innocent X.  During his time as cardinal, Odescalchi was beloved by his people for his love, charity, and devotion to his position.  He spent the majority of his time and effort trying to preserve the purity of faith and the morals that governed this purity.  This effort to maintain traditionalism and wholesomeness resulted in regulating the dress of Roman women, suppressing the gambling houses, and encouraging receiving daily Communion.  
Odescalchi was actually introduced to the famine-stricken people of Ferrara as “Mittimus patrem pauperum,” meaning “father of the poor” because of his characteristic attention to their needs.  In 1650 Odescalchi was named Bishop of Novara, where he spent six years spending all of his time and money on helping the sick and the poor of his diocese.  In 1656 he resigned and went to Rome to work with various congregations there.  
It was expected that Odescalchi would become pope with the death of Clement IX in 1669, but King Louis XIV of France used his royal influence to keep Odescalchi out in favor of Clement X.  When Clement X died in 1676, Louis XIV tried once again to keep Odescalchi out of the papacy but was forced to approve him due to tremendous popular support for Odescalchi from the Cardinals and the Roman citizens.  Odescalchi officially became Pope in 1676 under the name Innocent XI, and spent much of his time in the papacy combating the ideologies and actions of King Louis XIV.  
In a papal bull issued in 1679, “Sanctissimus Dominus,” Innocent XI condemned sixty-five propositions that favored a laxist or liberal approach to moral theology, including two related to 
		abortion.  The first that he rejected, proposition thirty-four, stated: “It is lawful to procure 
		abortion before 
		ensoulment of the fetus lest a girl, detected as pregnant, be killed or defamed.”  The second, proposition thirty-five, stated: “It seems probable that the fetus (as long as it is in the uterus) lacks a rational soul and begins first to have one when it is born; and consequently it must be said that no 
		abortion is a homicide.”  The modern 
		Roman Catholic Church still rejects these statements.  The denunciation of these propositions clarified the 
		Church’s doctrine regarding 
		abortion as homicide, and distanced the Church from claims that the value of the fetus depended on the moment at which it became 
		ensouled.  
Innocent XI died 11 August 1689 in Rome, Italy.  Pope Benedict XIV began and Popes Clement XI and Clement XII continued the beatification of Innocent XI, but an accusation of Jansenism (the idea that Christ died for the elect and not for all of humanity and that human nature is corrupt), along with negative French influence, caused the effort to cease.  Appeals for his beatification were later renewed, however, and Pope Innocent XI was beatified by Pope Pius XII in 1956.
Pope Innocent XI’s attempt to preserve the morals of the 
		Church resulted in what has become his footprint on 
		Roman Catholicism’s history surrounding 
		embryology, namely the condemnation of several important propositions that he felt were not in line with Catholic teachings.  The rejection of the two propositions that referenced 
		abortion and 
		ensoulment defined the stance of the 
		Church in favor of the life of the fetus, defended 
		ensoulment at some time before birth, and stated that all 
		abortions should be considered homicide. 

Sources
Mackler, Aaron.  Introduction to Jewish and Catholic Bioethics. Washington DC: Georgetown University Press, 2003.
Ott, Michael T.  “Pope Innocent XI.”  The Catholic Encyclopedia, Volume VIII.  Transcribed by Douglas J. Potter.  New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910.  http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/08021a.htm  (Accessed June 4, 2007).


How to cite
Brind'Amour, Katherine,, Garcia, Benjamin, "Pope Innocent XI (1611-1689)". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2007-11-11). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/1732.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
© Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Wednesday, March 18, 2015 - 19:05
 Topic
Subject
 Innocent XI, Pope, 1611-1689; People