By Mary Drago
Published: 2014-04-09
Keywords: Hermaphrodite, Hermaphroditism, Ambiguous Sex, gender
 Hermaphrodites and the Medical Invention of Sex (1998), by Alice Domurat Dreger Hermaphrodites and the Medical Invention of Sex, by historian of science Alice
	Domurat Dreger, was published in 1998 by Harvard University Press. In the book, Dreger describes
	how many doctors and scientists treated human hermaphrodites from the late nineteenth century to
	the early twentieth century. She states that during this time period, many physicians and
	scientists struggled to determine the nature sex, and to support a classification of sex as male
	or female, many physicians and scientists resorted to viewing a person's gonads for
	identification of his or her sex. At the time that this book was published, Dreger was a faculty
	associate at the Center for Ethics and Humanities in the Life Sciences at the College of
	Medicine, University of Michigan, Michigan.
 In the Prologue, "But My Good Woman, You Are a Man," Dreger tells the story of Sophie V.,
	who in 1886 at the age of forty-two, sought medical help  in a Belgium surgical
	clinic from a physician, whom Dreger calls Professor Michaux. Sophie V. sought help because her newly
	married husband could not enter her vagina during sexual intercourse. Michaux examined Sophie
	and discovered what he believed to be a testicle and a penis, and he declared that Sophie V. was
	a man. To Michaux, Sophie V.'s anatomy outweighed the forty-two years she had lived as a woman.
	Dreger asserts that Sophie V.'s story highlights the difficulties that arise when trying to
	assign a sex of either male or female to persons whose anatomies differ from the standard
	combinations of attributes considered to be male, such as a penis, prostate, and testicles, or
	those considered to be female that include a clitoris, uterus, and vagina. People whose
	anatomical combinations did not match one of those standards were typically classed as
	hermaphrodites, and after the early 1900s also came to be medically labeled as intersexual.
	Dreger then outlines the chapters of the book, noting that the chapters are arranged
	thematically rather than chronologically.
Dreger tells of two other hermaphrodites in the first chapter, "Doubtful Sex." Their
	anatomies guided physicians to question the sex by which each had been raised. Dreger contends
	that by the 1870s most researchers held the view that embryos begin with the same anatomy but
	develop differently in utero to become either male or female fetuses. Dreger charges that
	many of the men of medical and scientific profession espoused that male genitalia represented a
	higher level of development than did female genitalia.
As of the end of the twentieth century, hermaphrodites were classified into three categories:
	true hermaphrodite, male pseudo-hermaphrodite, or female pseudo-hermaphrodite. A true
	hermaphrodite was an individual who had one or more gonads that contained testicular and ovarian
	attributes, or an ovotestis. A female pseudo-hermaphrodite had ovarian tissue, and exhibited
	an XX chromosomal basis, but the external genitalia was masculinized.
	A male pseudo-hermaphrodite had testicular tissue, an XY chromosomal basis, but
	the external genitalia were not fully developed masculine genitalia, or looked feminine, and such
	an individual may also develop breasts. Dreger calls the period of time from 1890 to 1915 the
	"Age of the Gonads"—when using gonadal tissue, functioning or not, to label an individual
	was first employed. In 1917 Richard Goldschmidt, a researcher in Germany, used the term
	intersexual to describe individuals with a wide range of sexual ambiguities, and Dreger reports
	in her book, that the term was sometimes used by medical professionals, although individuals
	with ambiguous genitalia were still commonly labeled hermaphrodites.
Dreger describes some of the conditions that cause pseudo-hermaphroditism.
	Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), a condition in which a genetically female fetus produces
	large amounts of androgens or male sex hormones, is the predominant cause of female
	pseudo-hermaphroditism. The androgens cause a male-like development of the external genitalia.
	Androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) is one cause of male pseudo-hermaphroditism. With AIS, a
	genetically male fetus has testes but lacks the receptor that can use the androgens produced by
	the testes, so the external genitalia develop to look like those on normal females. Dreger
	recounts that around 1837, Isidore Geoffrey Saint-Hilaire, a professor of comparative anatomy at
	the Faculty of Sciences, in Paris, France, included hermaphrodites in the field he named
	teratology, which studied the phenomena that he called monstrosities, so that such anomalies
	could be prevented in the future.
Dreger notes that by the end of the twentieth century, the medical community still struggled
	to determine the characteristics that definitively assign a sex of either male or female to
	hermaphrodites. She asserts that researchers didn't limit these characteristics to body parts,
	but also included behaviors and desires. Some homosexuals and early feminists challenged 
	sexual boundaries in the early twentieth century. Dreger notes that some
	scientists argued that the social sex order mirrored a natural order.
 In the second chapter, "Doubtful Status," Dreger reports that some hermaphrodites were
	famous because they were on exhibition. This was as either curiosities in public fairs or to
	medical men through medical texts and professional society meetings. Doctors, Dreger asserts,
	often viewed hermaphrodites with a sense of amusement and voyeurism. A physician, Fraciszek
	Neugebauer, and a surgeon, Jean Samuel Pozzi, who were both in Europe during the 1920s, traveled
	to consult on suspected cases of hermaphroditism and chronicled the cases in an effort to
	increase scientific knowledge about hermaphroditism. 
Although many scientists  claimed that hermaphroditism arose because of
	arrested or altered sexual development in the fetus, they couldn't explain the developmental
	changes. Researchers looked at the family histories of hermaphrodites to determine if in the
	family histories there were other hermaphrodites. They also questioned the mother of the
	child, as many held that maternal impressions or frightful experiences of the pregnant woman could
	affect the development of the fetus. With Frank Rattray Lillie's study of the freemartin in 1916, scientists and researchers began to study the internal secretions or hormones released by the
	fetus during development as a cause for changes in sexual differentiation. 
In Chapter 3, "In Search of the Veritable Vulva," Dreger details the characteristics that
	physicians commonly used to determine the sex of a hermaphrodite. Many physicians asserted
	that the gonads of an individual would reveal themselves through various behaviors. If a person
	with ambiguous genitalia was raised as a female, and yet did not exhibit the expected modesty or
	gentle play behavior of a female, physicians might have labeled her a true male. Likewise,
	physicians may have assigned the true sex of a hermaphrodite raised as a male to female if the
	hermaphrodite possessed little facial or body hair. Dreger states that physicians also included
	sexual desires in the characteristics that would identify the true sex of an individual. Using
	this rationale, if the individual in question preferred females, then the true sex of that
	individual was determined to be male.
Dreger discusses the manner in which Louise-Julie-Anna was treated to begin Chapter four
	"Hermaphrodites in Love". Like Sophie V., Louise-Julie-Anna was raised as a woman and identified
	herself as a woman. The physicians who examined her disagreed when they discovered on her a small penis
	and testicles. Because Louise-Julie-Anna stated that she was sexually attracted to
	men, the physicians questioned her psychological and moral state, as by their definition
	Louise-Julie-Anna was a man.
In 1911 Samuel Pozzi, a physician in France, developed a method to classify the sexuality of
	hermaphrodites. His criteria coincided with the many physicians of his time, who emphasized that
	doctors check that the sexual desire of an individual matched the sexual desires that they
	considered appropriate for the hermaphrodite's gonads. For Pozzi, if an individual had
	testicles, the appropriate sexual desires for the individual would be toward women, whereas if
	the individual had ovaries, the appropriate sexual desire would be for men.
Dreger states in Chapter 5 "The Age of Gonads" that classification systems of hermaphrodites
	in the middle of the nineteenth century were not divided along gonadal lines. Scientists in
	France commonly used Isidore Geoffrey Saint-Hilaire's classification system, which devoted one
	of the four tetratological kingdoms to hermaphroditism. In Britain, scientists used the system
	devised by physician James Young Simpson, which differed from Saint-Hilaire's. Theodor Albrecht
	Edwin Klebs, a researcher in Germany, introduced the classification system which divided
	hermaphrodites into true hermaphrodites and pseudo hermaphrodites based upon their gonads in
	1876.
In 1896 George F. Blacker, a physician, and Thomas William Pelham Lawrence, a museum curator,
	both in London, UK, adapted Klebs's system to further refine a definition of true
	hermaphroditism. Blacker and Lawrence insisted that a microscopic examination of the gonadal
	tissue was the only method to determine the sex of the gonads. Dreger asserts that Blacker and
	Lawrence sought to clear the historical record of any mistaken cases of true hermaphroditism.
	Many previously reported cases of true hermaphroditism did not meet their requirements and thus,
	Blacker and Lawrence excluded many of them. Further, as physicians rarely performed biopsies on
	living persons in the early twentieth century, Blacker and Lawrence's insistence on microscopic
	examination of gonadal tissue meant that other true hermaphrodites could only be identified
	after death or castration. Dreger suggests that such classification systems preserved the
	differences between males and females, based upon their reproductive capabilities, at a time
	when she claims sexual boundaries were being challenged.
According to Dreger, Blair Bell, a surgeon in London, UK, was the first to distinguish
	between sex and gender in 1915. Bell maintained that assigning a true sex to match
	non-functioning gonads would disrupt the social happiness of the patient. Bell suggested that
	the predominance of the secondary sex characteristics should be a contributing factor to the
	determination of the true sex, and that physicians and surgeons could surgically eliminate any
	confusion in anomalous bodies.
In the Epilogue, "Categorical Imperatives", Dreger highlights the influences of early
	twentieth century medicine in the medical treatment of intersexuality in late twentieth century
	medicine. Many physicians used the psychosocial gender-identity theory espoused in the 1950s by
	John Money, a researcher at Johns Hopkins in Baltimore, Maryland, which states that gender
	identity should be fixed early in a child's life and encourages surgery to correct ambiguous
	genitalia. According to Dreger, in these instances, physicians determined a person's sex based
	upon the future ability for sexual intercourse. Specifically, if a genetic male child has a
	penis length of less than 2.5 centimeters, surgeons should remove the penis and reconstruct the
	genitalia for a female appearance. For genetic females, regardless of the appearance of their
	genitalia, surgeons should fashion the genitalia to acceptable female norms.
Dreger challenged physicians to delay surgeries or hormonal treatments that are not medically
	necessary until the intersexed child can choose his or her sex. Dreger suggests that physicians
	meet with the parents of an intersexed child to articulate how the child's anatomy may devlop
	based upon the child's genetic composition, hormone production levels, and current anatomy.
	Dreger also recommends that physicians direct parents of an intersexed child to support groups,
	so that an intersexed child will understand that he or she is not alone.
Hermaphrodites and the Medical Invention of Sex received conflicting reviews. Some
	faulted Dreger's argument that the classification system of hermaphrodites gave rise to a
	homosexual identity. Despite this criticism, the book offers a historical account of
	hermaphroditism with regard to the medical and scientific communities in the late nineteenth
	century and early twentieth century, and it describes how beliefs generated in that time influenced later
	views of sex, gender and sexuality. 
 Sources Bell, William Blair. "Hermaphroditism." Liverpool Medico-Chirurgical Journal 35 (1915):
272–92.
Blacker, George F. and Thomas W.P. Lawrence. "A Case of True Unilateral Hermaphroditism with
Ovotestis Occuring in Man, with a Summary of Criticism and the Recorded Cases of True
Hermpahroditism." Transactions of the Obstetrical Society of London 38 (1896): 265–309.https://archive.org/stream/transactionsobs23londgoog#page/n352/mode/2up (Accessed April 9, 2014).
Darwin, Charles. On the Origins of Species. London: John Murray, 1859. http://
darwin-online.org.uk/content/frameset?pageseq=1&itemID=F373&viewtype=text
Dreger, Alice Domurat. Hermaphrodites and the Medical Invention of Sex. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1998.
Lillie, Frank R. The Problems of Fertilization. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1919. http://books.google.com/books?id=
Zcw5AAAAMAAJ&oe=UTF-8 (Accessed April 9, 2014).
Kennedy, Meegan. "Book Review: Hermaphrodites and the Medical Invention of Sex." Journal of
Medical Humanities 22 (2001): 167–9.
Klebs, Edwin. Handbuch der pathologischen Anatomie [Handbook of Pathological Anatomy]
Berlin: A. Hirschwald, 1876. http://books.google.com/books?id=MAA1AQAAMAAJ (accessed April 9, 2014).
Money, John, Joan G. Hampson, and John L. Hampson. "Imprinting and the establishment of gender
role." Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry 77 (1957): 333 
Money, John. "Hermaphroditism, gender and precocity in hyperadrenocorticism: psychologic
findings." Bulletin of the Johns Hopkins Hospital 96 (1955): 253. 
Pozzi, Samuel. "Pseudo-hermaphrodite male" Bulletins de la
Société d'anthropologie de Paris [Bulletin of the Anthropological Society of Paris] 12 (1889):
602–8. https://archive.org/stream/bulletinsetmmo0312sociuoft#page/602/mode/2up (Accessed April 9, 2014).
Saint-Hilaire, Isidore Geoffroy. Histoire générale et particuliére des anomalies de
l'organisation chez l'homme et les animaux: ouvrage comprenant des recherches sur les caractéres, la
classification, l'influence physiologique et pathologique, les rapports généraux, les lois et les
causes des monstruosités, variétés et vices de conformation, ou traité de tératologie. [General
history and particular abnormalities of the organization in humans and animals: work will include
research into the characters, classification, physiological and pathological influence, general
reports, laws and causes of monstrosities, varieties and vices of conformation, or treatise on
teratology]. 3 Vols. and atlas. Paris: Balliere, 1832–1837. http://dx.doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.50400 (Accessed April 9, 2014).
Simpson, James Young. Anaesthesia, Hospitalism, Hermaphroditism and a Proposal to Stamp Out
Small-pox and Other Contagious Diseases. Edinburgh: Adam and Charles Black, 1871.
https://archive.org/stream/39002011124865.med.yale.edu#page/n5/mode/2up (Accessed April 9, 2014).
Stern, Curt. Richard Benedict Goldschmidt, 1878-1958: A Biographical Memoir. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1967.
Vicinus, Martha. "Hermaphrodites and the Medical Invention of Sex (review)." Victorian
Studies 42 (1999/2000): 321–3.
Wolfe, Linda D. "Hermaphrodites and the Medical Invention of Sex." American Journal of Human
Biology 11 (1999): 698–9.


How to cite
Drago, Mary, "Hermaphrodites and the Medical Invention of Sex (1998), by Alice Domurat Dreger". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-04-09). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/7818.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Wednesday, April 9, 2014 - 21:19
 Topic
Subject
Disorders of Sex Development; Sex; Intersex people; Gonads-diseases; Gonads--Diseases; Literature