By Aliya Butler, Seward Sheraden
Published: 2008-11-17
Keywords: Contraception, Reproduction
 Progestin: Synthetic ProgesteroneProgestin is a synthetic form of 
		progesterone, a naturally occurring hormone, which plays an important role in the female reproductive cycle. During the 1950s two types of progestin that were later used in 
		birth control pills were created, 
		norethindrone and 
		norethynodrel. In 1951 
		Carl Djerassi developed 
		norethindrone at 
		Syntex, SA Laboratories located in Mexico City, receiving a patent on 1 May 1956. In 1953 
		Frank Colton developed 
		norethynodrel at 
		G.D. Searle and Company Laboratories located in Chicago, receiving a patent on 29 November 1955. These two types of synthetic progesterone are important to the history of 
		embryology as part of the 
		birth control movement, because they facilitated the development and creation of 
		the birth control pill, which changed the way people viewed 
		birth control and revolutionized women’s birth control methods. 
During the 1940s there was a strong desire among chemists and pharmaceutical companies to develop synthetic steroids because of advances in basic knowledge of hormones and endocrinology. Also, the development and commercial success of cortisone, a steroid used for the treatment of arthritis, encouraged the exploration of steroids for treatment of other medical problems. It was believed that sex hormones in particular would hold great potential for possible treatments.  The steroid research programs of commercial laboratories at this time focused on simply creating synthetic steroids and then supplying them to researchers and physicians to discover and develop uses for them.

		Djerassi was the first to develop a synthetic progestin known as 
		norethindrone. He had long been interested in steroids and came to 
		Syntex because of the opportunity to focus on steroid synthesis. Russell Marker, who also worked at Syntex, had discovered in 1943 that progestin could be synthesized in large quantities from diosgenin, a steroid found in Mexican yams, through a process known as “marker degradation.” Although this work was not directly related to 
		Djerassi’s development of 
		norethindrone, it established 
		Syntex as a major site for hormone research and production, facilitating 
		Djerassi’s later work.
At the same time, 
		Frank Colton developed 
		norethynodrel at 
		G. D. Searle and Company in Chicago. 
		Norethynodrel is a potent, orally active progestin that differs from 
		norethindrone only in the location of one of its carbon double bonds.  Both synthetic progestins, 
		norethindrone and 
		norethynodrel, function in 
		birth control by elevating 
		progesterone levels and preventing 
		ovulation, mimicking the conditions during pregnancy. 
		Norethindrone was considered to induce more masculine tendencies and was prescribed to women who had problems such as tender breasts prior to 
		menstruation. 
		Norethynodrel was considered to have more feminizing tendencies and was prescribed to women who had problems with acne.
Neither 
		Djerassi nor 
		Colton had intended for the compounds to be used in 
		birth control pills, assuming instead that they would be used to treat gynecological disorders such as irregular menstrual cycles and endometriosis, which causes painful 
		menstruation and infertility. However, both 
		Searle and 
		Syntex, unaware of 
		Gregory Pincus’ research agenda, had supplied samples of their compounds to him at the 
		Worcester Foundation, where Pincus and others were actively developing a hormonal 
		birth control pill. In October 1955 at the Fifth International Conference on 
		Planned Parenthood, 
		Pincus reported that based on tests in rats, the two compounds norethindrone and norethynodrel were the most promising for use in a birth control pill based on their ability to prevent ovulation. These findings were also published in Endocrinology and 
		Science.
Ultimately norethynodrel was chosen for use in 
		Enovid, the first hormonal 
		birth control pill, which was marketed in 1960. This selection was because of 
		Pincus’ ties to 
		Searle through his past consulting work, as well as 
		Searle’s enthusiasm for the 
		birth control pill.  On the other hand, 
		Syntex laboratories was associated with Parke-Davis Pharmaceuticals, who were reluctant to produce a 
		birth control pill due to concern over religious and moral backlash. In 1962, 
		norethindrone was marketed by Ortho, a division of Johnson and Johnson, as the 
		birth control pill 
		Ortho-Novum. Despite initial hesitation in selling birth control, in 1964 Parke-Davis gained rights to norethindrone acetate, a derivative of norethindrone, from Syntex, giving Syntex a large share of the birth control market.
By 1969 there were twenty-two different brands of pills marketed in the US, and they differed by the amounts of progestin and 
		estrogen they contained. At this time the most commonly used progestin was still 
		norethindrone. 
		Enovid had contained very large doses of 
		norethynodrel and some 
		estrogen, but due to the side effects from such large doses of hormones, it was no longer prescribed as an 
		oral contraceptive. 
		Ortho-Novum was still used in 1969 because it contained much smaller doses of hormones and did not have the same side effects.
The creation of progestin is important to understanding and controlling development because of the role it played in the development of the hormonal birth control pill. Although this was not its intended purpose, progestin and 
	synthetic estrogen (specifically ethinyl estradiol) are essential components of the birth control pill and other birth control technologies, such as 
	Plan B.

Sources
American Experience. “People and Events: The Development of Synthetic Hormones.” Public Broadcasting System.  http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/pill/peopleevents/e_hormones.html. (Accessed September 18, 2008)
Djerassi, Carl. This Man’s Pill: Reflections on the 50th Birthday of the Pill. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.
Djerassi, Carl. The Pill, Pygmy Chimps, and Degas. New York: Basic Books, 1992.
Kistner, Robert W. The Pill: Facts and Fallacies about Today’s Oral Contraceptives. New York: Delacorte Press, 1969.
Pincus, Gregory, et al. “Effects of Certain 19-Nor Steroids.” Science 1224 (1956). 890–91.
Pincus, Gregory. “Some Effects of Progesterone and Related Compounds upon Reproduction and Early Development in Mammals.” Report of the Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Planned Parenthood (October 24–29, 1955, Tokyo, Japan). 175–84.
Pincus, Gregory, et al. “Studies of the Biological Activity of Certain 19-Nor Steroids.” Endocrinology 59 (1956): 695–707.
Watkins, Elizabeth Siegel. On the Pill: A Social History of Oral Contraceptives, 1950–1970. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998.


How to cite
Butler, Aliya,, Sheraden, Seward, "Progestin: Synthetic Progesterone". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2008-11-17). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/1957.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
© Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Wednesday, September 25, 2013 - 15:53
 Topic
Subject
Progesterone;  Technology