By Dorothy Regan Haskett
Published: 2014-04-15
Keywords: Lynn Margulis, Lynn Sagan, cell evolution, eukaryotic origin
 "On the Origin of Mitosing Cells" (1967), by Lynn Sagan "On the Origin of Mitosing Cells" by Lynn Sagan appeared in the March 1967 edition of the
	Journal of Theoretical Biology. At the time the article was published, Lynn Sagan
	had divorced astronomer Carl Sagan, but kept his last name. Later, she remarried and changed her
	name to Lynn Margulis, and will be referred to as such throughout this article. In her 1967
	article, Margulis develops a theory for the origin of complex cells that have enclosed nuclei,
	called eukaryotic cells. She proposes that three organelles: mitochondria, plastids, and basal
	bodies, which are all parts of eukaryotic cells, were once free-living cells that took
	residence inside primitive eukaryotic cells. This process Margulis called endosymbiosis. Margulis'
	theory explained the origin of eukaryote cells, which are the fundamental
	cell type of most multicellular organisms and form the basis of embryogenesis. After
	fertilization, embryos develop from a single eukaryotic cell that divides by mitosis.
 When the Journal of Theoretical Biology published her article in 1967, Margulis was a
	professor at Boston University in Boston, Massachusetts. Margulis
	independently proposed ideas similar to those proposed by biologists in the late nineteenth and
	early twentieth centuries. At the end of the nineteenth century, several researchers advanced
	theories similar to symbiosis, two of whom were Richard Altmann of Leipzig, Germany, and Peter Kropotkin
	who was exiled from Russia and
	living in England. At the beginning of the twentieth century, researchers such as Boris
	Kozo-Polyansky in Russia and Ivan Wallin, a professor at the University of Colorado in
	Boulder, Colorado, also proposed theories similar to that of endosymbiosis.
These earlier biologists theorized that the energy-producing mitochondria, and the
	photosynthesizing plastids of algae and plants, resulted from a symbiotic relationship between
	different types of free-living cells.  In addition, several of the researchers also hypothesized
	that the sub-cellular organelles contained hereditary information similar to that found in the
	nucleus. However, when earlier biologists put forth theories of symbiosis, they
	lacked the technological resources to test them. By the time Margulis proposed her theory,
	evidence for symbiosis theories was available from microscope studies of cells, electron microscopy, genetics, and
	molecular biology. Such evidence enabled Margulis to support her theories with experimental
	data.
"On the Origin of Mitosing Cells" has four main sections: an "Introduction," followed by
	 sections titled, "Hypothetical Origin of Eukaryotic Cells," in which Margulis presents a theory
	 for the origin of eukaryotic cells;  "Evidence from the Literature," in which she reviews the
	 literature that supports the sequence of the origin of eukaryotic cells; and "Some
	 Predictions," in which she presents experimental evidence that support predictions made based
	 on her theory.
 In the "Introduction," Margulis states that all free-living organisms are made of cells. She
	describes differences between eukaryotic cells, which have distinct nuclei, and prokaryotic
	cells, which lack distinct nuclei. Researchers didn't note those differences until the 1960s,
	shortly before Margulis published her paper. Margulis focuses on three sub-cellular
	organelles of eukaryotic cells, the mitochondria, chloroplasts, and (9+2) basal bodies, which
	she asserts were once free-living prokaryotic cells. (9+2) basal bodies are organelles found at
	the base of eukaryotic whip-like structures, such as the flagellum of sperm cells.
Margulis begins her argument with a section titled, "Hypothetical Origin of Eukaryotic
	Cells," which has multiple subsections. She describes the state of prokaryotic cells of two
	billion years ago, before the accumulation of free oxygen in the atmosphere. At that time,
	prokaryotic cells contained DNA, they synthesized proteins on structures made of RNA, called
	ribosomes, and they used messenger RNA (mRNA) to help build those proteins from DNA. With oxygen accumulating in the
	atmosphere, prokaryotic cells developed nucleotide sequences, or genes, that coded for molecules
	that could bind with metals and oxygen, called porphyrins. This mutation provided a protective
	advantage from the harmful effects of oxidization. Margulis explained that these cells evolved
	to contain mechanisms that used oxygen to produce the molecule that stores energy in cells,
	adenosine-5'-triphosphate (ATP), and other nucleotides that used solar energy, which the
	chlorophyll-like porphyrins absorbed and used to produce complex sugars. In contrast, more
	primitive cells, called heterotrophs, fermented ATP from simple sugars.
	Additionally, some porphyrins used oxygen to release and to store ATP in the absence of light, a
	process called  aerobic respiration.
 Next, Margulis discusses how eukaryotic cells evolved from prokaryotic cells via
	endosymbiosis. Margulis suggests the emergence of eukaryotes was a response to the new
	oxygen-containing atmosphere. From geological evidence, oxygen became present in the atmosphere
	as early as 2.7 billion years ago, however the atmosphere became oxygen rich 1.2 billion years
	ago. Margulis argues that to survive and reproduce, cells had to adapt to the oxygen
	rich environment or find a specialized environment lacking oxygen. She suggests the eukaryotes
	originated when an anaerobic heterotroph living on organic matter ingested an aerobic microbe.
	The ingested microbe became obligate and resulted in, as Margulis calls it, the first aerobic
	amoeboid organism. Margulis hypothesizes that some of these amoeboid organisms ingested motile
	prokaryotes (flagellates) that became symbiotic with their host, and thus classical mitosis evolved.
	Mitosis is a process by which a non-reproductive cell divides into two genetically identical
	cells, thus passing all of its genetic  information to the two daughter cells.
Margulis next discusses the evolution of mitosis in protists and hypothesizes that a motile
	spiral shaped bacteria was one of the prokaryotes ingested by the large amoeboids, and that the
	amoeboids became hosts to the motile parasites. Amoeboids benefited from this endosybmiont
	relationship, as the motility of the parasite gave the host the ability to pursue
	food before mitosis evolved. Margulis then proposes that the endosymbiont genes, which give rise
	to the (9+2) substructure, evolved over generations to form chromosomal
	centromeres, the structures that link together the individual chromatids from duplicated chromosomes. She also
	claims that the endosymbiotic genes contributed to the small centrioles that facilitate
	cell mitosis in animals.  Margulis
	hypothesized  that the motile prokaryote parasite was the ancestor of the flagellum found in later eukaryotic
	cells.
 Margulis two further topics in the first section of her paper. First,
	she recreates the steps in evolution of the centromeres, centrioles, and the (9+2) flagella
	basal bodies from steps for which she had found support in other publications. Then she discusses the evolution
	of eukaryotic plants, a process she attributes to symbiotic relationships between protozoans and
	prokaryotic algae. Margulis asserts that the process of mitosis  took millions of years to
	evolve, and she claims that the process evolved millions of years after the evolution of
	photosynthesis. Margulis then argues that her hypothesis on the origin of eukaryotes is
	inconsistent with the theory that eukaryotic plant cells first evolved 
	photosynthesis, which eliminates oxygen from plants, and then structured that process into membrane-bound plastids. Instead, Margulis
	proposes that plants acquired photosynthetic plastids through multiple symbiotic relationships
	that occurred over time, each of which led to endosymbiosis.
 In the next section of her paper, "Evidence from the Literature," Margulis supports her theory by discussing publications on the subject up through 1967. Margulis considers the
	claim that the more traits two organisms share, the more closely related those organisms
	are. She says that the hypothesis holds for some organisms, but not for single celled microbes.
	Margulis acknowledges that she had inadequate data to support that claim, but she contends that the recent
	studies in molecular biology confirm her theory.  Margulis then proposes to use methods from molecular biology to address issues in taxonomy. She next proposes that photosynthesis
	evolved separately in several diverse organisms. Then, Margulis reviews the general properties
	of symbiosis, and she says that the origin of eukaryotic cells indicates that larger cells
	acquired mitochondria, the genome of the (9+2) complex flagellum, and the photosynthetic
	plastids by endosymbiosis.
 Margulis reports that the
	literature lists six general criteria for organelles derived by endosymbiosis. She applies these
	criteria to the three organelles, mitochondria, plastids, and the basal bodies, and she concludes
	that they could have evolved by endosymbiosis, but that the eukaryotic cell nucleus could not have.
	In the remaining sections of her literature review, Margulis concentrates on the origin of the
	prokaryotic cells, which she argues evolved into the organelles of eukaryotic cells. Margulis
	describes the evolution of photosynthesis in cells, the accumulation of oxygen in the atmosphere, and
	the evolution of aerobic cells. She then discusses research on how mitochondria
	self-replicate, and she includes a table with a list of mechanisms by which eukaryotic cells, throughout mitosis and their life cycles, retain mitochondria and chloroplasts.
 Margulis concludes with the third and final section of the paper, "Some Predictions." She
	suggests that some of the classifications presented in the phylogenetic tree put forth by previous
	scientists were likely in error. But if her hypothesis about the origination of the three
	organelles is correct, so too should be her classification of all eukaryotes. However, Margulis
	predicts that if these three organelles—mitochondria, plastids, and basal bodies—did originate
	as free-living microbes, then new technologies would provide researchers the tools
	required to grow those organelles in vitro. Mitochondria and chloroplasts cannot grow outside of
	cells, because they have lost too many genes to be free living again.
	Margulis concludes that all eukaryotic cells must be regarded as multi-genome systems. She says
	that the evolution of mitosis in primitive eukaryotic cells enabled
	genes to pass independently from one generation to the next.
 Margulis submitted "On the Origin of Mitosing Cells" to at least fifteen journals before it
	was accepted and published in June 1967. She later expanded on the theory of endosymbiosis in a
	book titled, Origin of Eukaryotic Cells, published in 1970. In
	1981, Margulis published a revised edition titled, Symbiosis in Cell Evolution, which
	included molecular data to support her findings. In 1993 she published another edition of
	Symbiosis in Cell Evolution claiming that the difference between prokaryotes and
	eukaryotes is the most significant division in biology.
By the 1990s, Margulis' theory on the origin of eukaryotes had influenced many scientists. In
	2011, John M. Archibald, a professor and researcher at
	Dalhousie University, in Nova Scotia, Canada, said that Margulis'  Origin of Eukaryotic
	Cells influenced scientists to accept the
	process of endosymbiosis in the evolution of cells.
 Sources Altmann, Richard. Die Elementarorganismen und ihre Beziehungen zu den Zellen. [Elemental organisms and their relationships to the cells]. Leipzig: Veit, 1894. https://play.google.com/books/reader?printsec=frontcover&output=reader&id=D88aT1Y76uQC&pg=GBS.PP7 (Accessed April 11, 2014). 
Archibald, John M. "Origin of Eukaryotic Cells: 40 Years On." Symbiosis 54 (2011):
69–86.
Gray, Michael W., and W. Ford Doolittle. "Has the Endosymbiont Hypothesis Been Proven?"
Microbiological Reviews (1982): 1–42. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC373208/ (Accessed April 11, 2014).
Kozo-Polyansky, Boris M. Novyi printzip biologii. Ocherk teorii simbiogeneza. Moscow: Puchina, 1924. Translated by Victor Fet as Symbiogenesis: A New Principle of Evolution. Eds. By Victor Fet and Lynn Margulis. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2010.
Kropotkin, Peter A. "Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution." New York: McClure Philips and Co., 1902. 
Lane, Nick. Power, Sex, and Suicide: Mitochondria and the Meaning of Life. New York:
Oxford University Press, 2005.
Margulis, Lynn. 1970. Origin of Eukaryotic Cells;Evidence and Research Implications for a
Theory of the Origin and Evolution of Microbial, Plant, and Animal Cells on the Precambrian
Earth. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Margulis, Lynn. Symbiosis in Cell Evolution: Life and its Environment on the Early Earth.
San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1981.
Margulis, Lynn. Symbiosis in Cell Evolution: Microbial Communities in the Archean and
Proterozoic Eons. 2nd ed. New York: Freeman, 1993
Margulis, Lynn. "Symbiogenesis. A new principle of evolution rediscovery of Boris Mikhaylovich Kozo-Polyansky (1890–1957)." Paleontological Journal 44 (2010): 1525–39.
Sagan,Lynn. "On the Origin of Mitosing Cells." Journal of Theoretical Biology 14 (1967):
225–74. 
Wallin, Ivan Emmanuel. Symbionticism and the Origin of Species. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1927. http://dx.doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.11429 (Accessed April 11, 2014).
Weber,Bruce. "Lynn Margulis, Evolution Theorist, Dies at 73." New York Times, November
24, 2011, Science section, New York Times.com. http://www.nytimes.com/2011/11/25/science/lynn-margulis-trailblazing-theorist
-on-evolution-dies-at-73.html?_r=1& (Accessed  May 5, 2013). 


How to cite
Haskett, Dorothy Regan, ""On the Origin of Mitosing Cells" (1967), by Lynn Sagan". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-04-15). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/7820.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Wednesday, April 16, 2014 - 00:43
 Topic
Subject
cell division; eukaryotic; mitosis; endosymbiosis; flagella; symbiosis; Literature