By M. Elizabeth Barnes
Published: 2014-09-19
Keywords: neurocristopathies, neural crest cells, Julia Platt
 NeurocristopathiesNeurocristopathies are a class of pathologies, or disorders, in vertebrates,
including humans, that result from abnormal expression, migration,
differentiation, or death of neural crest cells (NCCs) during embryonic development. NCCs are cells
derived from the embryonic cellular structure called the neural crest.
Abnormal NCCs can cause a neurocristopathy by chemically affecting the
development of the non-NCC tissues around them. They can also affect the
development of NCC tissues, causing defective migration or
proliferation of the NCCs. There are many neurocristopathies
that affect many different types of systems. Some neurocristopathies
result in albinism (piebaldism) and cleft palate in humans. Various
pigment, skin, thyroid, and hearing disorders, craniofacial and heart
abnormalities, malfunctions of the digestive tract, and tumors can be
classified as neurocristopathies. This classification ties a variety of
disorders to one embryonic origin.
A neural crest is a cellular
structure that arises early in the development of a vertebrate
embryo. It becomes visually distinct from other germ layers during the
neurula stage of the embryo, when the neural plate folds and becomes
the neural tube. Subsequently, the cells derived from the neural crest,
NCCs, migrate down several different paths as the embryo develops. As
they migrate, they differentiate into diverse cell types that contribute
to a wide range of organs and tissues including the eyes, ears, face,
heart, digestive system, and skin. There are three categories of
NCCs based on their shared paths of migration and contribution to
organs: trunk (tNCCs), sacral and vagal, cardiac (CarNCCs), and cranial
(CNCCs). The diversity of NCCs contribution to different biological
systems explains why neurocristopathies encompass such a wide range of
disorders.
Robert Bolande, a physician at McGill University in Montreal,
Canada, coined the term neurocristopathy in his 1974 article "The
Neurocristopathies: A Unifying Concept of Disease Arising in Neural
Crest Maldevelopment." He argued that the classification of
neurocristopathy helped unify multiple disorders under one concept. This
classification traced the disorder to a common origin. The disorders'
neural crest origins explained why many of these disorders often occur
together in an individual. Bolande divided neurocristopathies into four
categories: tumors, tumor syndromes, malformations, and all other
neurocristopathies.
Due to the rediscovery of cranium cells derived from neural crest cells
in the latter half of the twentieth century, the cataloged number and
variety of neurocristopathic disorders has increased since Bolande's
1974 publication. Following Bolande's publication, researchers studied how NCCs contribute to craniofacial skeleton
abnormalities. Researchers, including Gillian Morris-Kay working in 1987
at the University of Oxford in Oxford, UK, found that many craniofacial
abnormalities resulted from the defective development of NCCs, therefore
making them neurocristopathies. One example of a neurocristopathic
craniofacial abnormality is the cleft palate, which occurs in
approximately five in every 2,000 US births.
Decades before
researchers classified craniofacial abnormalities as neurocristopathies, several biologists proposed
that the craniofacial skeleton developed from NCCs.
The first was Julia Platt, working
in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, who discovered in 1893 that NCCs
contribute to structures in the cranium of mudpuppies. Many researchers rejected Platt's research because it contradicted
the germ layer theory, which described the mesoderm as the germ layer
that was the only progenitor of the craniofacial skeleton. Throughout the
first half of the nineteenth century, several independent experiments
done by Francis Leroy Landacre at Ohio State University in Columbus,
Ohio, and Leon Stone at Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut,
illustrated problems with the germ layer theory by demonstrating the NCC
contribution to craniofacial structures.
Doctors in the early
twenty-first century continued to classify neurocristopathies using
Bolande's four categories of tumors, tumor syndromes, malformations, and
all other neurocristopathies. Neurocristopathic tumors are tumors that
affect only one type of tissue, and they all arise from abnormal tNCCs.
Neuroblastomas, also called malignant embryomas, are the most common
tumors found in small children. They are neuroendocrine adrenal gland
tumors and arise from abnormal tNCC neurons. Another type of
neurocristopathic tumor, in the bowel and gastrointestinal tract,
doctors call carcinoid. These tumors arise from tNCC originated adrenal
medulla cells. A related disorder, due to its tNCC origin and effects on
the digestive tract, is Hirschsprung disease, which doctors characterize
by a lack of ganglia in the colon. However, it is not a tumor.

Neurocristopathic tumor syndromes affect multiple tissues, as opposed to
the neurocristopathic tumors, which only affect one. An example of these
syndromes is neurofibromatosis. Neurofibromitosis occurs when abnormal
Shwann cells arise from tNCCs and cNCCs.  This syndrome
results in neuroid tumors, discoloration of the skin, and possible
scoliosis or other abnormalities of the bones. Another example is Sipple
syndrome, which results from abnormal calcitonin producing cells that
originate from vagal NCCs. Sipple syndrome is associated with the
appearance of several types of tumors throughout the neuroendocrine
system including thyroid and adrenal carcinomas.
 Neurocristopathic
malformations affect the configuration of body structures. Abnormal
mesenchymal cells derived from cNCCs cause these types of malformations.
One example is a disorder that consists of several malformations that
often occur together. These disorders are abbreviated as the CHARGE
association and include an abnormal iris (Coloboma of the iris), Heart
defects, abnormal tissue blockage of the nasal pathway (Atresia of
choanae), Retardation of physical and mental development, Genital
anomalies, and deafness. Neurocristopathic malformations of the eyes,
ears, and jaw are called Mandibulofacial dysostosis and Otocephaly. A
cleft palate is classified in this group of disorders.
 Researchers use
the miscellaneous group for neurocristopathic disorders that do not fit
into the previous classifications. These disorders affect pigment of
skin cells by abnormal pigment cells derived from vagal NCCs. The most
recognizable neurocristopathic pigment disorder is albinism. 
Some researchers characterize neurocristopathies by the
type of NCC that caused the abnormality. For instance, one type of NCCs,
the cranial neural crest cells (cNCCs), migrate away from the neural
crest during development, eventually contributing to the cartilage and
bone of the skull. Therefore, neurocristopathies derived from abnormal
cNCCs will affect regions of the skull. While other types of
NCCs, vagal and sacral, cardiac, and trunk (tNCCs), develop into other
structures such as skin pigment, neurons and ganglia form other
structures of the head, neck, gut, and certain structures of the heart.
Therefore, neurocristopathies derived from these NCCs may affect the
nervous system, the digestive tract, color of skin, or the heart.

Researchers also classify neurocristopathies by discerning whether the
disorder results from defective migration of NCCs or from defective
proliferation of NCCs. Defects in the migration of NCCs during
development result in malformation disorders such as CHARGE association,
Mandibulofacial dysostosis, and Otocephaly. Proliferation defects, on the
other hand, result in dysplasias such as neuroblastomas, carcinoid
tumors, and neurofibromatosis.
 Researchers have traced some
neurocristopathies to abnormal functioning of the Hox genes, a set of
genes responsible for body patterning. For instance in 1993, Maureen
Gendron-Maguire and colleagues at the Roche Institute of Molecular
Biology Roche Research Center in Nutley, New Jersey, found that an
increase of products made from the Hox 1.1 gene induces a cleft palate in mice. And in
1995, Nancy Manley and Mario Capecchi working at the University of Utah
School of Medicine in Salt Lake City, Utah, discovered that, by deleting
Hox 1.6 in a mouse embryo, they could induce development of the embyo
without a cranial ganglia. 
Researchers have shown that teratogens,
substances that produce defects to an embryo or fetus, also contribute
to neurocristopathies by disrupting the growth and migration of NCCs.
Ethanol has been shown to induce craniofacial neurocristopathies, such
as cleft palate. Thus, there is a connection between abnormal NCCs and the
facial abnormalities that occur in newborns with fetal alcohol syndrome.

After 2009, neurocristopathic research focused on the molecular basis of
NCC cell proliferation and migration. Researchers examined the chemical
outputs of specific NCCs related to particular disorders during
development. They also manipulated the environments of embryos during
development to induce a disorder to pinpoint the cause of the
NCCs abnormalities. Also, researchers described specific genes that may
contribute to the disorder, such as the Hox genes previously mentioned.
Scientists have identified other types of genes that contribute to
neurocristopathies such as Hirschsprung disease, which is a mutation in
the gene Sox10. 
 Sources Bolande, Robert
		P. "The Neurocristopathies: A Unifying Concept of Disease
		Arising in Neural Crest Maldevelopment." Human Pathology 5
		(1974): 409–29.
Bolande, Robert P. "Neurocristopathy: It's Growth and Development in
Twenty Years." Pediatric Pathology and Laboratory Medicine 1 (1997):
1–25.
Etchevers, Heather C.; Amiel, Jeanne; Lyonnet, Stanislas. "Molecular
Bases of Human Neurocristopathies." In Neural Crest Induction and
Differentiation, ed Jean-Pierre Saint-Jeannet, 213–34. 2006.
http://www.landesbioscience.com/pdf/Saint-Jeannet_Lyonnet.pdf (Accessed
April 30, 2014).
Gendron-Maguire, Maureen, Moises Mallo, Maobin Zhang, and Thomas
Gridley. "Hoxa-2 Mutant Mice Exhibit Homeotic Transformation of Skeletal
Elements Derived from Cranial Crest." Cell 75 (1993): 1317–31.
Hall, Brian K. The Neural Crest And Neural Crest Cells In Vertebrate
Development And Evolution. New York: Springer, 2009.
Hall, Brian K. "The Neural Crest and Neural Crest Cells: Discovery and
Significance for Theories of Embryonic Organization." Journal of
Biosciences 33 (2008): 781–93.
http://www.ias.ac.in/jbiosci/dec2008/781.pdf  (Accessed April 30, 2014).
Jiang, Xiaobing, David H. Rowitch, Philippe Soriano, Andrew P. McMahon,
and Henry M. Sucov. "Fate of the Mammalian Cardiac Neural Crest."
Development 127 (2000): 1607–16.
http://dev.biologists.org/content/127/8/1607.full.pdf (Accessed April
30, 2014).
Manley, Nancy and Mario Capecchi "The Role of Hoxa-3 in Mouse Thymus and
Thyroid Development." Development 121 (1995): 1989–2003.
http://dev.biologists.org/content/121/7/1989.full.pdf+html (Accessed
April 30, 2014).
Morris-Kay, Gillian, and Seong-Seng Tan. "Mapping Cranial Neural Crest
Cell Migration Pathways in Mammalian Embryos." Trends in Genetics 3
(1987): 257–61.
Landacre Francis L. "The Fate of the Neural Crest in the Head of the
Urodeles." Journal of Comparative Neurology 33 (1921): 1–43. http://biodiversitylibrary.org/page/11907886 (Accessed April 30, 2014).  
Platt, Julia B. Ectodermic Origin of the Cartilages of the Head.
Massachusetts: Medford, 1894.
Stone, Leon S. "Further Experiments on the Extirpation and
Transplantation of Mesectoderm in Amblystoma punctatum." Journal of
Experimental Zoology 44 (1926): 95–131.

 

How to cite
Barnes, M. Elizabeth, "Neurocristopathies". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-09-19). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8202.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Tuesday, September 23, 2014 - 20:27
 Topic
Subject
pathology; Embryology; Germ Layers; Neural Crest; Cells; Vertebrates; Development; Bolande, Robert P.; Cleft palate; Albinism; Concept