By Zane Bartlett
Published: 2014-11-14
Keywords: Alexey Olovnikov
 The Hayflick LimitThe Hayflick Limit is a concept that helps to explain the
	mechanisms behind cellular aging. The concept states that a normal human
	cell can only replicate and divide forty to sixty times before it
	cannot divide anymore, and will break down by programmed cell death
	or apoptosis. The concept of the Hayflick Limit revised Alexis
	Carrel's earlier theory, which stated that cells can replicate
	themselves infinitely. Leonard Hayflick developed the concept while
	 at the Wistar Institute in Philadelphia,
	Pennsylvania, in 1965. In his 1974 book Intrinsic
	Mutagenesis, Frank Macfarlane Burnet named the concept after
	Hayflick. The concept of the Hayflick Limit helped scientists study
	the effects of cellular aging on human populations from embryonic
	development to death, including the discovery of the effects of
	shortening repetitive sequences of DNA, called telomeres, on the
	ends of chromosomes. Elizabeth Blackburn, Jack Szostak and Carol
	Greider received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2009
	for their work on genetic structures related to the Hayflick
	Limit.
Carrel, a surgeon in the early twentieth century France working
	on cultures of chick heart tissue, argued that cells can infinitely
	replicate. Carrel claimed that he had been able to have those heart cells
	replicate in culture for greater than twenty years. His experiments
	on chick heart tissue supported the theory of infinite replication.
	Scientists tried to replicate Carrel's work many times, but these
	repeated experiments never confirmed Carrel's findings.
Hayflick worked for the Wistar Institute in 1961 where he
	observed that human cells do not replicate infinitely. Hayflick and
	Paul Moorhead described the phenomenon in a paper titled "The serial
	cultivation of human diploid cell strains." Hayflick's job at the
	Wistar Institute was to provide cell cultures to scientists who
	conducted experiments at the Institute, but Hayflick pursued his own
	research on the effects of viruses in cells. In 1965, Hayflick
	further detailed the concept of the Hayflick Limit in cells in a paper titled "The
	limited in vitro lifetime of human diploid cell strains."
In that article, Hayflick concluded that a cell could complete
	mitosis, or cellular duplication and division, only forty to sixty
	times before undergoing apoptosis and subsequent death.  The
	conclusion held for many cell types, whether they were adult cells
	or fetal cells. Hayflick hypothesized that the limited replicative
	capability of the cell related to aging in cells and, consequently,
	to human aging.
The publication of Hayflick's experiments disconfirmed Carrel's theory about indefinite cellular replication.
	Some, such as Harry Rubin at the University of California at Berkeley
	in Berkeley, California, argued in the 1990s that the Hayflick Limit
	pertained only to damaged cells. Rubin suggested that cellular
	damage could result from the cells being in an environment that
	differed from their original environment in the body, or when
	researchers subjected the cells to laboratory practices.
Regardless of the criticism, other scientists used Hayflick's
	theory in support of further studies about cellular aging,
	especially with research in telomeres, which are repetitive
	sequences of DNA at the ends of chromosomes. Telomeres protect the
	chromosome from folding in on itself, and they decrease mutations in
	the DNA. In 1973, Alexey Olovnikov, in Russia, applied Hayflick's
	theories of cell death to his studies of the ends of chromosomes that
	did not replicate themselves during mitosis. He said that the process of cell
	division ends once the cell cannot replicate the ends of their
	chromosomes.
Although Olovnikov applied Hayflick's theory to his experiments,
	Olovnikov did not name Hayflick's theory. One year later in 1974,
	Burnet coined the term Hayflick Limit in his work, Intrinsic
	Mutagenesis. Burnet's work focused on the claim that age was
	intrinsic to the cells in each species and that they followed the
	Hayflick Limit, thus establishing a programmed age in which an
	organism would die. Elizabeth H. Blackburn at the University of
	California San Francisco in San Francisco, California, and Jack W.
	Szostak at Harvard Medical School in Boston, Massachusetts, also
	applied Hayflick's theory of cellular aging to their research on the
	structures of telomeres in 1982, when they cloned and isolated
	telomeres. In 1989, Greider, and Blackburn further developed the
	theory of cellular aging to discover the enzyme that replicates
	telomeres, called telomerase. Greider and Blackburn found that the
	presence of telomerase helps cells escape programmed cell death.
With theories about the biological mechanisms behind aging,
	scientists expected that they could create a cure for aging.
	Hayflick helped found the National Institute on Aging in Bethesda,
	Maryland, in 1974, a branch of the National Institutes of Health in
	the United States. In 1982, Hayflick also became the president of
	the Gerontological Society of America, founded in 1945 in New York, New
	York. Hayflick role helped to spread the theory of the Hayflick Limit
	and to further counter the theory of cellular immortality as
	established by Carrel.
In 2009, Blackburn and Szostak received the Nobel Prize in
	Physiology or Medicine for their work on telomerase, in which the
	Hayflick Limit played an essential role. 
 Sources Burnet, Frank Macfarlane. Intrinsic Mutagenesis. Houten:
		Springer Netherlands, 1974.
Carrel, Alexis. "On the permanent
		life of tissues outside the organism." Journal of Experimental
		Medicine 15 (1912): 516–28. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2124948/pdf/516.pdf (Accessed November 11, 2014).
Greider, Carol W., and Elizabeth H.
		Blackburn "A telomeric sequence in the RNA of Tetrahymena
		telomerase required for telomere repeat synthesis." Nature 337
		(1989): 331–7.
Hayflick, Leonard. "C.V." Aging Intervention
		Foundation. http://www.agelessanimals.org/hayflickcv.htm
		(Accessed September 7, 2013).
Hayflick, Leonard. "The limited in
		vitro lifetime of human diploid cell strains." Experimental Cell
		Research 37 (1965): 614–36.
Hayflick, Leonard, and Paul S.
		Moorhead. "The serial cultivation of human diploid cell
		strains." Experimental Cell Research 25 (1961): 585–621.
Hayflick, Leonard. Web of Stories. July, 2011.
		http://www.webofstories.com/play/leonard.hayflick/1 (Accessed October 5, 2013).
Jiang, Lijing. "Degeneration in Miniature
		History of Cell Death and Aging Research in the Twentieth
		Century." PhD diss., Arizona State University, 2013.
		http://hdl.handle.net/2286/R.A.114558 (Accessed May 21, 2014).
Nobel Prize. "The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 2009"
		Nobel Media.
		http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates/2009/
		(Accessed October 5, 2013).
Olovnikov, Alexey M. "A theory of
		marginotomy. The incomplete copying of template margin in
		enzymic synthesis of polynucleotides and biological significance
		of the phenomenon." Journal of Theoretical Biology 41 (1973):
		181–90.
Rubin, Harry. "Telomerase and cellular lifespan: ending
		the debate?" Nature Biotechnology 16 (1998): 396–7.
Shay, Jerry
		W., and Woodring E. Wright "Hayflick, his limit, and cellular
		ageing". Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 1 (2000): 72–6.
Szostak, Jack W. and Elizabeth H. Blackburn. "Cloning yeast
		telomeres on linear plasmid vectors." Cell 29 (1982): 245–55.
		 

How to cite
Bartlett, Zane, "The Hayflick Limit". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-11-14). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8237.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Saturday, November 15, 2014 - 00:18
 Topic
Subject
 Hayflick, Leonard; Cells; Cell populations; Cell death; Apoptosis; Cell proliferation; Cell cycle; Carrel, Alexis, 1873-1944; Aging; Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology; Telomere; Chromosomes; Telomerase; Greider, Carol W.; Blackburn, Elizabeth H.; Concept