By Zane Bartlett
Published: 2015-03-23
Keywords: telomere, Embryogenesis
 Telomerase in Human DevelopmentTelomerase is an enzyme that regulates the lengths of telomeres in
	the cells of many organisms, and in humans it begins to function int the early stages of embryonic development. Telomeres are repetitive sequences of DNA on the ends
	of chromosomes that protect chromosomes from sticking to each other
	or tangling. In 1989, Gregg Morin found that telomerase was present
	in human cells. In 1996, Woodring Wright and his team examined human
	embryonic cells and found that telomerase was active in them. Scientists
	manipulate telomerase in cells to give cells the capacity to
	replicate infinitely. Telomerase is also necessary for stem cells to
	replicate themselves and to develop into more specialized cells in embryos
	and fetuses.
Carol Greider and Elizabeth Blackburn discovered telomeres in 1978. Greider was
	Blackburn's student at the University of California in Berkeley, California.
	Blackburn had used the protozoon Tetrahymena
	thermophila to study telomeres in the process of cellular
	replication. In 1985 Greider and Blackburn discovered in Tetrahymena terminal
	transferase, which later was called telomerase.  
	Greider and Blackburn found that telomerase was a type of enzyme
	that organizes DNA at the end of the strand in a reverse fashion from normal
	transcription. Scientists label any enzyme that follows the
	reverse pattern as a reverse transcriptase. Telomerase consists of
	protein and RNA that add thymine and guanine (TTGGGG) repeated
	nucleotide sequences on the ends of chromosomes. Telomerase fills a gap on the chromosome that exists due to imperfect DNA
	replication. DNA replication is imperfect because there is a space
	where the enzyme DNA polymerase detaches from the DNA strand. 

	In
	1994 at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in Cold Spring Harbor, New York, Lin Mantell and
	Greider showed that telomerase was necessary in
	germline and embryonic cells of developing frogs Xenopus
	laevis. For their work with telomeres and telomerase,
	Greider and Blackburn received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or
	Medicine in 2009, along with Jack Szostak.
Building upon the finding of telomerase in Tetrahymena,
	Gregg Morin studied if telomerase was present in human cells. In 1989,
	while working at Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut, Morin
	isolated telomerase from human HeLa cells. HeLa cells are named
	after Henrietta Lacks, a cervical cancer patient from whom the
	cells were taken. HeLa cells are cancerous cells that proliferate
	indefinitely. The telomerase that Morin found in the HeLa cells
	differed from the telomerase found in Tetrahymena. HeLa
	cells' telomerase had a six-nucleotide sequence of thymine, adenine
	and guanine (TTAGGG). Morin hypothesized that totipotent cells, or
	cells capable of becoming any types of cells such as embryonic stem
	cells, produced telomerase to retain the infinite replicative
	properties needed for an organism to develop.
Mantell and Greider verified Morin's hypothesis in Xenopus
	in 1994. Mantell and Greider found that during early development,
	telomerase is highly active. Telomeres were active throughout
	embryogenesis and oogenesis in Xenopus egg cells.
	The researchers also found that germline cells, such as cells found
	in the ovaries and testes of Xenopus, continued to produce
	telomerase. Mantell and Greider further suggested that telomerase
	functions in germline cells to preserve telomeres for future
	generations.
In 1996, scientists verified Morin's hypothesis in humans.
	Woodring Wright, Piatyszek Mieczyslaw, William Rainey, William Byrd,
	and Jerry Shay at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas,
	Texas, performed an experiment that detected high amounts of
	telomerase activity in human blastocysts, and in tissues at
	sixteen to twenty weeks after fertilization. The activity rapidly
	declined and became undetectable after the neonatal period, or the
	first twenty-eight days of a child's life post-birth. Wright and his
	team concluded that the human body regulates and represses
	telomerase activity after birth except in some tissues.
	Particularly, Wright's team found that telomerase was expressed in
	fetal, newborn, and adult testes and ovaries, but not in mature sperm
	or eggs, which differed from the results found in Xenopus. Wright
	and his team hypothesized that the difference was due to the fact
	that human sperm telomeres do not shorten with age, and human
	zygotes produce telomerase after the first cell division, therefore
	egg cells need not carry telomerase.
In 2001, researchers including Diane L. Wright at the Eastern
	Virginia Medical School in Norfolk, Virginia, found that telomerase
	is necessary for cells in human embryos to rapidly proliferate.
	Cells need telomerase during embryogenesis because as they
	replicate, their telomeres shorten. Without the presence of
	telomerase, the first few cells in the zygote would be unable to
	replicate and develop into an embryo and eventually a fetus. The scientists reported that
	telomerase was active in every stage of development of the embryo.
	They also observed that while telomerase activity was necessary for
	an embryo to develop, the amount of telomerase present did not
	predict the potential for embryonic growth.
Scientists found that genetic variation between humans influences
	telomerase activity during development and adult life. In 2010,
	researchers including Gil Atzmon at the Albert Einstein College of
	Medicine in Bronx, New York, published a study that explains the
	effects of telomerase in centenarians of Ashkenazi Jewish descent.
	That research showed that the centenarians and their offspring
	showed increased production of telomerase. Due to that increase, 
	those studied had fewer than normal age-related diseases such as
	cardiovascular disease and diabetes mellitus, as well as other
	diseases caused by genetic mutations. The researchers named the
	genes associated with the increase in telomerase activity hTERT  and
	hTERC. They further hypothesized that hTERT and hTERC became active
	during development and that their repression was not as drastic
	after birth for those studied as it was for those in a more general population.
Although scientists researched the link between telomerase
	activity and the process of how cells replicate, some criticized the way the
	data was produced. Critics of the research, such as Harry Rubin at
	the University of California, Berkeley, California, argued that the
	data collected on telomerase could be skewed by experimental
	techniques. Rubin argues that incorrect data of telomerase activity
	can result from tumor cells within the population or the result of a
	virus that causes overproduction of telomerase. Others argued that
	scientists over emphasized research into telomerase and telomeres and
	that other elements of development and the cell cycle are overlooked due to the attention given to telomeres. 
 Sources Atzmon, Gil,
		Miook Cho, Richard M. Cawthon, Temuri Budagov, Micol Katz, Xioman
		Yang, Glenn Siegel, Aviv Bergman, Derek M. Huffman, Clyde B.
		Schechter, Woodring E. Wright, Jerry W. Shay, Nir Barzilai,
		Diddahally R. Govindaraju, and Yousin Suh. "Genetic variation in
		human telomerase is associated with telomere length in Ashkenazi
		centarians." Proceedings of the National Academy of
		Sciences 107 (2010): 1710–7. http://www.pnas.org/content/107/suppl_1/1710.full (Accessed March 11, 2015).
		
Aubert, Geraldine, and Peter M. Langsdorp. "Telomeres and aging"
		Physiological Reviews 88 (2008): 557–79. http://physrev.physiology.org/content/88/2/557.short (Accessed March 11, 2015).
Blackburn, Elizabeth H., and Joseph G. Gall. "A tandemly
		repeated sequence at the termini of the extrachromosomal
		ribosomal RNA genes in Tetrahymena." Journal of Molecular
		Biology 120 (1978): 33–53. 
Greider, Carol W., and Elizabeth H. Blackburn. "A telomeric
		sequence in the RNA of Tetrahymena telomerase required for
		telomere repeat synthesis." Nature 337 (1989):
		331–7.
Greider, Carol W., and Elizabeth H. Blackburn.
		"Identification of a specific telomere terminal transferase
		activity in Tetrahymena extracts." Cell 43 (1985):
		405–13. http://www.cell.com/cell/pdf/0092-8674(85)90170-9.pdf (Accessed March 11, 2015).
Greider, Carol W., and Elizabeth H. Blackburn. "The telomere
		terminal transferase of Tetrahymena is a ribonucleoprotein
		enzyme with two kinds of primer specificity." Cell 51
		(1987): 887–98. 
Hayflick, Leonard. "The limited in vitro lifetime of human
		diploid cell strains." Experimental Cell Research 37
		(1965): 614–36. 
Hayflick, Leonard, and Paul S. Moorhead. "The serial
		cultivation of human diploid cell strains." Experimental Cell
		Research 25 (1961): 585–621. 
Jiang, Lijing. "Degeneration in Miniature: History of Cell
		Death and Aging Research in the Twentieth Century." PhD diss.,
		Arizona State University, 2013. http://repository.asu.edu/attachments
		/114558/content/Jiang_asu_0010E_13292.pdf (Accessed June 6,
		2014).
Lin, Jue, Elissas Epel, and Elizabeth H. Blackburn. "Telomeres and
		lifestyle factors: roles in cellular aging." Mutation
		Research 730 (2012): 85–9. 
Mantell, Lin L., and Carol W. Greider. "Telomerase activity in
		germline and embryonic cells of Xenopus." EMBO Journal 13
		(1994): 3211–7. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC395213/pdf/emboj00061-0269.pdf (Accessed March 11, 2015).
Morin, Gregg B. "The human telomere terminal transferase
		enzyme is a ribonucleoprotein that synthesizes TTAGGG repeats."
		Cell 59 (1989): 521–9. 
Nobel Prize. "The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
		2009." Nobel Media. http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates/2009/ (Accessed March 11, 2015).
Olovnikov, Alexey M. "A theory of marginotomy. The
		incomplete copying of template margin in enzymic synthesis of
		polynucleotides and biological significance of the phenomenon."
		Journal of Theoretical Biology 41 (1973): 181–90. 
Rubin, Harry. "Telomerase and cellular lifespan: ending the
		debate?" Nature Biotechnology 16 (1998): 396–7.
Szostak, Jack W., and Elizabeth H. Blackburn. "Cloning yeast
		telomeres on linear plasmid vectors." Cell 29 (1982):
		245–55. 
Wright, Diane L., Estella L. Jones, Jacob F. Mayer, Sergio
		Oehninger, William E. Gibbons, and Susan E. Lanzendorf.
		"Characterization of telomerase activity in the human oocyte and
		preimplantation embryo." Molecular Human Reproduction 7
		(2001): 947–55. http://molehr.oxfordjournals.org/content/7/10/947.long (Accessed March 11, 2015).
Wright, Woodring E., Piatyszek A. Mieczyslaw, William E.
		Rainey, William Byrd, and Jerry W. Shay. "Telomerase activity in
		human germline and embryonic tissues and cells."
		Developmental Genetics 18 (1996): 173–9.  

How to cite
Bartlett, Zane, "Telomerase in Human Development". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2015-03-23). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8307.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Monday, March 23, 2015 - 16:54
 Topic
Subject
 Telomerase; Telomere; DNA; Molecular biology; Somatic embryogenesis; Embryos; Developmental biology; Blackburn, Elizabeth H.; Greider, Carol W.; Szostak, Jack W.; Nobel Prize winners; Women Nobel Prize winners; DNA replication; Concept