By Lindsey O'Connell
Published: 2013-07-10
Keywords: recapitulation, Laws of Development, Meckel-Serres law
 The Meckel-Serres Conception of RecapitulationJohann Friedrich Meckel and Antoine Etienne Reynaud Augustin Serres developed in the
	early 1800s the basic principles of what later became called the Meckel-Serres Law. Meckel and
	Serres both argued that fetal deformities result when development prematurely stops, and they
	argued that these arrests characterized lower life forms, through which higher order organisms
	progress during normal development. The concept that the embryos of higher order organisms
	progress through successive stages in which they resemble lower level forms is called
	recapitulation. Meckel, a professor of anatomy at the University of Halle in Halle, Germany, and
	Serres, a physician at Hôtel-Dieu de Paris in Paris, France, did not work together.
	Rather, in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, their similar approaches, in which
	they compared the anatomy and embryos of different species so as to relate stages of embryonic
	development to the scala naturae, led other scientists to generalize their individual
	concepts into one general theory. The recapitulation ideas of Meckel and Serres became part of
	the mid-eighteenth century debate about how to explain morphological similarities between
	species.
The concept of scala naturae, or the great chain of being, had an early
	proponent in Aristotle, who worked in Greece four centuries before the common era.
	Aristotle’s scala naturae arranged all organisms into a hierarchy based on the
	complexity of their form. Humans topped Aristotle's hierarchy. After Aristotle, various groups
	restructured the scala naturae to reflect God’s place in creating the hierarchy of
	nature. In this new framing of the scala naturae, humans maintained their position at the
	top of the earthly creatures because of their likeness to the Deity, but were placed under God
	and the Angels.
During the early 1800s, when Meckel and Serres first articulated their
	doctrines of recapitulation, many accepted the scala naturae as the main explanation for
	the large variety of species found on earth. Aristotle had hinted at recapitulation, or the idea
	that embryos pass through the morphological stages of beings lower on the scala naturae.
	Following Aristotle, many scientists attempted to find examples of recapitulation in developing
	embryos, such as in the chick (Gallus gallus). Meckel and Serres took these ideas of a
	scala naturae and recapitulation and applied them to their own embryological studies.
Meckel was born in 1781 in Halle, Germany. He grew up helping his father prepare specimens
	for the family’s anatomical collection, and he became professor of anatomy at the
	University of Halle. Meckel was meticulous in his comparative study of abnormal embryological
	specimens, which he collected from all over the world. During Meckel’s lifetime, he wrote
	multiple treatises on comparative anatomy and in his 1811 text, Beyträge zur
	vergleichenden Anatomie (Contributions to Comparative Anatomy), Meckel outlines the
	idea that embryonic stages of higher forms recapitulate the forms of animals that reside lower
	on the great chain of being. Meckel used malformations, which he saw as the results of early
	terminations to development, to help support his theory of recapitulation. To do so, he compared
	the arrested organs from organisms high on the scala naturae to the normally developed
	organs of organisms lower on the scala. Meckel’s method of comparison between
	higher and lower organisms enabled him to argue that the organs of the higher life forms
	developed through the stages of lower morphologies; thus, development mirrored the hierarchy of
	organisms within the scala naturae. 
Serres, a physician at Hôtel-Dieu de
	Paris in Paris, France, worked with Etienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, a professor of zoology at
	Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle (National Museum of Natural History) in
	Paris. Serres published two volumes of comparative work on vertebrate brains in 1821, for which
	he received an award from the Académie des Sciences (Academy of Sciences). Serres
	argued that the developing human brain progressed through the hierarchy of nature as it
	developed; at first it looked like the brain of a fish, then a reptile, then a bird, and
	lastly a general mammalian brain before finally settling into the form of a human brain. This
	order of brain development appeared to mirror the scala naturae. Serres argued that a
	formative force propelled the development of species, but the organisms in lower species had too
	little of the formative force to have their organs develop into the more complex organs found in
	higher species. For this theory, humans are the most complex life form because they have the
	greatest amount of what some later called Serres’ force.
In 1828 Karl Ernst von
	Baer, professor of anatomy at the University of Königsberg, in Königsberg, Germany,
	criticized the recapitulation theories of Meckel and Serres in his publication, Über
	Entwickelungsgeschichte der Thiere. Beobachtung und reflexion (On the Developmental History
	of the Animals. Observations and Reflections). Von Baer disagreed with the theory that Meckel
	and Serres had constructed to explain similarities in embryonic development across the animal
	kingdom. Von Baer opposed the strict linearity that Meckel and Serres embraced, which saw all
	organisms placed on a single chain of life. Instead, von Baer embraced the separation of the
	animal kingdom into four distinct archetypes, or fundamental body plans: the radiate, like the
	starfish; the mollusca, like clams and octopus; the articulate, like insects and lobsters; and
	the vertebrata, like fish and humans. He classified organisms into each of the four archetypes
	according to how those organisms developed from embryos. Von Baer reasoned that because animals
	could be divided into four archetypes, embryos could not recapitulate all lower forms throughout
	their development. Instead, von Baer argued that embryos appeared similar to their archetype at
	the beginning of development, and grew more specialized over time. Von Baer’s account of
	the relationship between development and the natural hierarchy of animals, articulated in his 1828
	text, formed the basis of what later scientists called von Baer’s Laws.
Following
	public dismissal by von Baer and by Richard Owen, Hunterian Professor at the Royal College of
	Surgeons, in London, England, the recapitulation ideas of Meckel and Serres fell out of favor
	among scientists beginning in the late 1830s. In 1859, Charles Darwin, who worked mainly at his
	country estate near Kent, England, argued for the theory of common descent among species in his
	book, On the Origin of Species. Darwin’s book prompted Ernst Haeckel, professor of
	comparative anatomy at the University of Jena, in Jena, Germany, to resurrect the main points of
	Meckel and Serres.  Haeckel’s new iteration of Meckel’s and Serres’
	ideas of recapitulation, for Haeckel called the biogenetic law, abandoned the explicit
	connection to the scala naturae. Instead, Haeckel embraced Darwin's theory of common
	descent as the framework that unites all organisms. The biogenetic law connected the study of
	embryonic development, called ontogeny, with the study of the relationships of descent between
	species, called phylogeny.
 Sources von Baer, Karl Ernst. Über Entwickelungsgeschichte der Thiere.
				Beobachtung und reflexion. [On the Developmental History of the Animals.
				Observations and Reflections]. Königsberg: 1828. 
				http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/28306 (Accessed May 3, 2012).
Breidbach, Olaf. “Post-Haeckelian Comparative Biology—Adolf
				Naef’s Idealistic Morphology.” Theory in Biosciences 122 (2003):
				174–93.
Gasking, Elizabeth B. “Serres, Antoine Étienne Reynaud
				Augustin.” Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography 12:
				315–6.
George, T. Neville. “Palingenesis and Paleontology.” Biological
				Reviews 8 (1933):107–35.
Gliboff, Sander. H. G. Bronn, Ernst Haeckel, and the Origin of German
				Darwinism: A Study in Translation and Transformation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
				2008.
Gould, Stephen Jay. Ontogeny and Phylogeny. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
				University Press, 1977.
Haeckel, Ernst. Generelle morphologie der organismen. [General Morphology
				of the Organisms]. Berlin: G. Reimer, 1866. 
				http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/22319#page/11/mode/1up (Accessed May 4,
				2012).
Hopwood, Nick. “Embryology.” In The Cambridge History of Science
				Vol. 6: The Modern Biological and Earth Sciences, eds. Peter J. Bowler and John
				V. Pickstone, 285–315. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Kluge, Arnold G., and Richard E. Strauss. “Ontogeny and
				Systematics.” Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 16 (1985):
				247–68.
Mayr, Ernst. “Recapitulation Reinterpreted: The Somatic Program.”
				The Quarterly Review of Biology 69 (1994): 223–32.
Meckel, Johan Friedrich. Beyträge zur vergleichenden Anatomie.
				[Contributions to Comparative Anatomy]. Halle: Reclam, 1811.
Rieppel, Olivier C. Fundamentals of Comparative Biology. Boston, MA:
				Birkhäuser Verlag, 1988.
Risse, Guenter B. “Meckel, Johann Friedrich.” Complete Dictionary
				of Scientific Biography 9: 252–3.
Russell, Edward Stuart. Form and Function: A Contribution to the History of
				Animal Morphology. London: J. Murray, 1916. 
				http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/15993#page/7/mode/1up (Accessed May 4,
				2012). 

How to cite
O'Connell, Lindsey, "The Meckel-Serres Conception of Recapitulation". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2013-07-10). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/5916.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Tuesday, February 17, 2015 - 22:55
 Topic
Subject
 Meckel, J. F. (Johann Friedrich), 1781-1833; Serres, Etienne Renaud Augustin, 1786-1868; Fetal development; Fetal growth; Birth defects; Fetus--Abnormalities; Embryological development; Developmental biology; Embryos; Embryology; Aristotle; Baer, Karl Ernst von, 1792-1876; Concept