By Ceara O'Brien
Published: 2014-03-23
Keywords: Blood Test, noninvasive sex determination
 Social Implications of Non-Invasive Blood Tests to Determine the Sex of Fetuses By 2011, researchers in the US had established that non-invasive blood tests can accurately
	determine the gender of a human fetus as early as seven weeks after fertilization. Experts
	predicted that this ability may encourage the use of prenatal sex screening tests by women
	interested to know the gender of their fetuses. As more people begin to use non-invasive
	blood tests that accurately determine the sex of the fetus at 7 weeks, many ethical
	questions pertaining to regulation, the consequences of gender-imbalanced societies, and altered
	meanings of the parent-child relationship.
Physicians have used technology to detect the sex of the fetus in gestation since the
	invention of the prenatal ultrasound in 1957. A prenatal ultrasound, also known as a sonogram,
	is a procedure in which doctors or nurses use  a machine that emits and receives high-frequency sound waves to create images on a monitor of
	a fetus in a woman's uterus. With ultrasounds, doctors or nurses can observe the anatomy of a fetus and thus detect its sex  around eighteen weeks of gestation, but depending on the position of the fetus, they
	do not always make accurate predictions.
 For decades, other technologies like amniocentesis and choronic villus sampling have helped
	researchers obtain genetic information about the fetus, including its sex during gestation.
	However, because these tests increase the risk of miscarriage, they are usually offered only to
	women who are at an elevated risk for carrying a child with a genetic disease. Amniocentesis
	involves the surgical insertion of a needle into the uterus of a pregnant woman to obtain fluid
	from the amniotic sac for analysis. Doctors have used amniocentesis since 1956, but it cannot be
	used until at least the fifteenth week of pregnancy. Additionally, amniocentesis carries a one
	in two hundred risk of miscarriage. Choronic villus sampling is a test in which a technician
	inserts a needle into a pregnant woman's uterus and removes a sample of chorionic villi from the placenta for testing. Choronic villi are branching outgrowths of the outer membrane that
	encloses the fetus that increase surface area for absorption of nutrients in the womb. Choronic
	villus sampling is performed between the ninth and twelfth week of pregnancy and carries a one
	to three percent risk of fetal loss. Less than two percent of all US pregnancies undergo
	amniocentesis or choronic villus.
 Many prenatal testing technologies were created, in part, as a means to avoid the
	birth of children with genetic diseases ranging from substantial to lethal. For example, in
	Europe, blood tests for detecting the sex of a fetus have been used to screen for
 sex-related genetic disorders, such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy, which affects boys.
	However, if the fetus is not at risk for those disorders, doctor's don't conduct the tests. Researchers 
	have shown that some people use this technology merely to detect the genetic sex of a fetus or embryo. Pre-implantation genetic diagnosis is a test to
	determine if an embryo has genetic or chromosomal disorders, but for embryos conceived through
	in-vitro fertilization (IVF).
In 1997, Yuk-Ming Dennis Lo, at Oxford University in Oxford, UK, and the Chinese University of Hong Kong in Shatin, Hong Kong and his
	colleagues discovered fetal DNA in the blood plasma of pregnant women. The DNA was not in cells.
	In the fifteen years following this discovery, techniques to isolate the fetal DNA from the
	maternal blood and test it for diagnostic purposes became available. In 2011, researchers published 
	the results of an  assessment to measure
	 the analytic validity of non-invasive fetal sex detection tests.
	The research team of this study included representation from several institutions, such as the
	Genetics and Public Policy Center for Johns Hopkins University, in Washington, DC, the
	US Department of Health and Human Services, at the US National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
	Maryland, and the Women and Infants Hospital, at Brown University, in
	Providence, Rhode Island. They performed a review and meta-analysis of studies in which
	researchers worked to detect fetal DNA in the blood of pregnant women, the results of which
	demonstrated that blood tests in a clinical setting can detect the genetic sex of fetuses after seven weeks of gestation with
	ninety-five to ninety-nine percent accuracy. 
 While researchers verified the accuracy of non-invasive prenatal genetic blood tests in 2011,
	private biotech companies had produced and sold these tests to consumers online and in US
	drugstore chains for years beforehand. An at-home test put on the market in 2005 by Acu-Gen, headquarter
	in Lowell, Massachusetts, who claimed that it could detect fetal gender five weeks into
	pregnancy with only a pinprick of the pregnant woman's blood, but the company soon faced many lawsuits and 
	filed for bankruptcy. In 2009, the company Sequenom,
	headquarted in San Diego, California, claimed to have an at-home prenatal blood test that
	detected Down syndrome with 99 percent specificity, but later research showed that the company's
	claim was not based on evidence. A variety of other brands existed on the market in the
	years that followed, some of which didn't  incite lawsuits or product recalls, but independently verified only to varying degrees.
 Up to at least 2014, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) didn't regulate non-invasive
	prenatal blood tests and the US federal government didn't certify medical labs to use them,
	which discouraged US physicians from prescribing such tests. The FDA did not regulate tests
	that detect the sex of the fetus because the tests are not officially categorized as a medical
	device. FDA approval is not needed for direct-to-consumer genetic screening tests as long as the
	blood samples are sent to a private lab and the test is sold as a service. In February 2012 the
	US National Society of Genetic Councilors, in Chicago, Illinois, recommended that non-invasive
	prenatal tests should be offered in a clinical setting only, and administered by a qualified
	health care provider. 
 Researchers have documented the occurrence and consequences of sex selection at a nationwide levels
	since the early 1990s. Brought about by social norms and the increased accessibility of the
	ultrasound, decades of sex selective practices in China and India have resulted in imbalanced
	gender ratios, which predominantly favor males. Researchers cite China's One Child Policy for
	accelerating the gender imbalance in China, as the nation incentivizes families to have only one
	child, and those families often choose to have male offspring. In the early twenty-first century, India
	and China restricted abortions as a means of sex selection, and other nations adopted similar stances against sex selection. 
 After reports indicated that people in several former soviet states selectively
	aborted female fetuses, in September 2011 the EU Council Committee adopted a resolution prohibiting
	doctors from informing parents of the sex of their fetus. Many countries, such as the UK,
	Canada, Australia, Japan, France, and Germany, prohibit the use of pre-implantation genetic
	diagnosis for sex selection. In contrast to these countries, the US had no federal
	restrictions on sex selection, before or after implantation. In the US, many treat the option of
	choosing whether or not to procreate, and in what manners, to be individuals' rights.
In the US, many discouraged the selection of sex via abortion, but in to the early
	twenty-first century, no regulations enforced such views. For example, a California company called
	Consumer Genetics sold a test called Pink or Blue that indicated fetal sex at eight weeks of
	pregnancy, however, Consumer Genetics stated that it does not want its test used for sex
	selection. Consumer Genetics sold approximately 1,000 Pink or Blue tests online per year, and
	the company stated that it would not test the blood samples unless the person submitting the
	sample signed a contract stating that they would not use the results for abortive sex
	selection. Critics noted that these contracts were largely symbolic because there was no mechanism
	in place to verify that customers who signed the contracts adhered to them.
	Consumer Genetics also said that it would not sell Pink or Blue tests to consumers living in
	China or India. 
Some people defended their desires to select for gender on the basis of the concept of family
	balancing, especially when using pre-implantation genetic diagnosis technology. Family balancing
	is the practice of choosing sex based on the sex of children the family already had. Some
	countries adopted partial regulatory measures to accommodate for family balancing. For example,
	parents in Israel can use sex selection if a family has four children of one gender and wants to
	select for a child of the opposite gender.  In the US, the 1973 Supreme Court decision Roe v.
	Wade legalized all abortions up through the first trimester on the basis of US
	constitutional right of privacy. 
 Some argue that choosing a fetus based upon such characteristics as sex treats the value of
	the child as conditional, and creates a parent-child relationship where value is measured by
	properties found desirable by the parent. Harvard professor Michael Sandel at Harvard University
	in Cambridge, Massachusetts, articulated these sentiments in his 2004 article, "The Case Against
	Perfection," maintaining that the quest to engineer the perfect child undermines human dignity.
	Thomas Murray, who was president of the bioethics institution the Hastings Center in Garrison, New York, from 1999
	through 2012, cautioned that when children's
	characteristics are regarded as products of choice, a potential harm ensues, as they are born
	with expectations of fulfilling a defined gender role. 
 Sources Belluck, Pam. "Test Can Tell Fetal Sex at 7 Weeks, Study Says." New York Times, August 9,
2011. http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/10/health/10birth.html (Accessed March 22, 2014).
Chen, Pi-Chao. "Birth Control Methods and Organisation in China." In China's One-Child Family
Policy, eds. Elisabeth Croll, Delia Davin, and Penny Kane, 135–48. Macmillan, 1985.
Devaney, Stephanie A., Glenn E. Palomaki, Joan A. Scott, and Diana W. Bianchi. "Noninvasive
Fetal Sex Determination Using Cell-Free Fetal DNA." Journal of the American Medical
Association 306 (2011): 627–36. http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=1104804 (Accessed March 22, 2014).
Gale, Thomson. "Prenatal Ultrasound." Gale Encyclopedia of Genetic Disorders. 2 (2005):
1055–60.
Greely, Henry T. "Get Ready for the Flood of Fetal Gene Screening." Nature 469 (2011):
289–91.
Kaiser, Jocelyn. "An Earlier Look at Baby's Genes." Science 309 (2005): 1476–78. 
Karsten, Hank. "Parental Gender Preferences and Reproductive Behaviour: a Review of the Recent
Literature." Journal of Biomedical Science 39 (2007): 759–67. 
Lo, Yuk-Ming Dennis, Noemi Corbetta, Paul F. Chamberlain, Vik Rai, Ian L. Sargent, Christopher W.G.
Redman, James S. Wainscoat. "Presence of Fetal DNA in Maternal Plasma and Serum." Lancet 350
(1997): 485–487.
Lo, Yuk-Ming Dennis, Mark S.C. Tein, Tze K. Lau, Christopher J. Haines, Tse N. Leung, Priscilla M.K. Poon, James S. Wainscoat, Philip J. Johnson, Allan M.Z. Chang, N. Magnus Hjelm. "Quantitative Analysis of Fetal DNA in Maternal Plasma and Serum: Implications for Noninvasive Prenatal Diagnosis." The American Journal of Human Genetics 62 (1998) 768–775. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929707609677 (Accessed March 22, 2014).
Macklin, Ruth. "The Ethics of Sex Selection and Family Balancing." Seminars in Reproductive
Medicine 28 (2010): 315–21. 
Medical Devices. "Is the Product a Medical Device?" U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

http://www.fda.gov/medicaldevices/deviceregulationandguidance/overview/classifyyourdevice/ucm051512.htm (Accessed April 15, 2012).
Roe v. Wade. 410 U.S. 113 (1973). 
http://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=12334123945835207673&q=roe+v+wade&hl=en
&as_sdt=806 . (Accessed April 15, 2012).
Sandel, Michael. "The Case against Perfection." The Atlantic Monthly 3 (2004): 51–62. 

http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2004/04/the-case-against-perfection/302927/ .
(Accessed April 15, 2012). 


How to cite
O'Brien, Ceara, "Social Implications of Non-Invasive Blood Tests to Determine the Sex of Fetuses". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-03-23). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/7648.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Monday, March 24, 2014 - 12:46
 Topic
Subject
Sex Determination Analysis; Sex Preselection; Sex Determination, Diagnostic; Sex Preselection; Fetus; Context