By Adam R. Navis
Published: 2009-01-13
Keywords: Mice, Chimeras
 “Formation of Genetically Mosaic Mouse Embryos and Early Development of Lethal (t12/t12)-Normal Mosaics”The paper “Formation of Genetically Mosaic Mouse Embryos and Early Development of Lethal (t12/t12)-Normal Mosaics,” by 
		Beatrice Mintz, describes a technique to fuse two 
		mouse embryos into a single 
		embryo. This work was published in the 
		Journal of Experimental Zoology in 1964. When two 
		embryos are correctly joined before the 32-cell stage, the 
		embryo will develop normally and exhibit a mosaic pattern of cells as an adult. Mosaics were easily characterized by 
		mouse fusions from 
		embryos of different colors; this produced clearly visible color patterns identifying the alternate cell types. 
		Mintz referred to the fused mice as mosaic or later as allophenic, but they are more commonly known today as 
		chimeras.
The first reported instance of a 
		chimera was identified in 
		cattle by comparing blood antigens of 
		cow fraternal twins. Ray D. Owen reported that an abnormal number of the twins had identical blood antigens. The adult 
		cows with similar antigens were found to have two different populations of red blood cells suggesting that the precursors of the red blood cells, 
		hematopoietic stem cells, were transferred from one twin to the other during development. In the 1950s human 
		chimeras were also identified by examining blood antigens and later confirmed by 
		karyotyping to reveal differences in chromosome patterns between the patient’s cells. Although 
Drosophila
chimeras had previously been produced, mammalian 
		chimeras were not successful until 
		Mintz developed a reliable technique for the production of embryonic fusions.

Beatrice Mintz conducted a previous study that examined a reproductive disorder characterized by two distinct populations of germ cells in heterozygous mice. One population was a group of normal, functioning germ cells, the other group did not divide and they did not migrate to the correct parts of the 
		embryo. 
		Mintz thought there might be a way to use dual populations of cells to study the action of the mutant cells. She wanted to apply this technique to the t12 mutation, which is characterized by a developmental arrest at the 
		morula stage, when the 
		embryo is composed of approximately thirty-two cells. She thought a fusion of a mutant 
		embryo with a normal 
		embryo might rescue function long enough to study the mechanism of the mutation similar to the way she studied the blood disorder.
The development of a 
		chimera was first reported by 
		Andrzej Krzysztof Tarkowski. Although he reported a novel approach to embryonic fusions, his technique was inefficient and the sole 
		mouse that survived long enough to observe the coat color did not show evidence of chimerism. At early stages, 
		embryos are surrounded by a protective layer named the 
zona pellicula that prevents two 
		embryos from fusing. 
		Tarkowski attempted to remove the 
zona pellicula by forcing 
		embryos through a glass needle. This often damaged the 
		embryos, reducing the success of the fusions. 
		Mintz instead removed the protective layer by treating the 
		embryos with pronase, a mixture of enzymes designed to degrade the 
zona pellicula, causing minimal damage to the 
		embryo. Once the 
zona pellicula was removed, she needed to fuse the 
		embryos. This was accomplished by introducing the 
		embryos to each other at 
		mouse body temperature. The 
		embryos easily adhered to each other and continued to develop as a single 
		mouse. 
		Mintz performed these fusions at different intervals in development and discovered that the 
		embryos could form 
		chimeras if they were fused at any point until the 
		morula stage. 
		Mintz’s method was much more efficient than 
		Tarkowski’s and she was able to produce the mottled coat color pattern that was evidence of a successful fusion.

		Mintz considered techniques only a means to an end. This technique was developed to study the t12 mutation, which arrests development at the 
		morula stage. She produced fusions of 
		embryos homozygous for t12 with control mice from the same genetic line. Some 
		embryos did not efficiently fuse and the 
		embryo segregated itself between mutant and normal cells. Many of the fusions developed long enough to produce discernible populations of cells. Each mosaic 
		embryo produced a different pattern of growth, but all the mutant cells began to grow larger in relation to the normal cells due to a reduction in the rate of cell division. This had been previously observed and validated earlier claims. This study, more importantly, provided a successful model for the use of 
		chimeras in experimental research.
The development of a method for fusing two 
		embryos has proved useful in many ways besides the direct study of the 
		embryos. 
		Mintz later used fusions of 
		embryos with a treated 
		teratoma cell line to produce a 
		mouse model of a human disease. 
		Teratomas are unique tumors capable of differentiating into a variety of cell types. When they produced the germ cells in a fusion, they were also able to produce viable offspring. The ability to introduce 
		embryonic stem cells into an 
		embryo has also been used to create 
		knock-out mice. These mice illustrate the role of a gene in development by inactivating the gene and observing development in its absence. This study is most noted for establishing a technique to consistently produce viable
chimeras, a technique that has continued to be an integral tool for the study of developmental biology.
 

Sources
Flannery, Maura C. “Beatrice Mintz (1921–).” In Women in the Biological Sciences: A Biobibliographic Sourcebook, eds. Louise S. Grinstein, Carol A. Biermann, and Rose K. Rose, 319–31. Westport: Greenwood Press, 1997.
Mintz, Beatrice. “Formation of Genetically Mosaic Mouse Embryos, and Early Development of ‘Lethal (T12/T12)-Normal’ Mosaics.” The Journal of Experimental Zoology 157 (1964): 273–92.
Owen, Ray D. “Immunogenetic Consequences of Vascular Anastomoses Between Bovine Twins.” Science 102 (1945): 400–401.
Tarkowski, Andrzej K. “Mouse Chimaeras Developed from Fused Eggs.” Nature 190 (1961): 857–60.


How to cite
Navis, Adam R., ""Formation of Genetically Mosaic Mouse Embryos and Early Development of Lethal (t12/t12)-Normal Mosaics" (1964), by Beatrice Mintz". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2009-01-13). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/1964.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
© Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Wednesday, March 18, 2015 - 23:51
 Topic
Subject
 Mintz, Beatrice; Experiment