By Sean Cohmer
Published: 2014-08-19
Keywords: Refrigerator Mother
 Early Infantile Autism and the Refrigerator Mother Theory (1943-1970)In 1943, child psychiatrist Leo Kanner in the US gave the
	first account of Early Infantile Autism that encouraged
	psychiatrists to investigate what they called emotionally cold
	mothers, or refrigerator mothers. In 1949, Kanner published
	"Problems of Nosology and Psychodynamics of Early Infantile Autism."
	In that article, Kanner described autistic children as reared in
	emotional refrigerators. US child psychiatrists
	claimed that some psychological or behavioral conditions might have
	origins in emotional or mental stress, meaning that they might be
	psychogenic. Kanner described autism's cause in terms of emotional
	refrigeration from parents into the early 1960s, often attributing
	autism to the lack of parental warmth. In the 1960s,
	Bernard Rimland and Bruno Bettelheim, both in the US, disagreed
	on the role of psychogenesis in autism. Rimland suggested that
	autism's cause was rooted in neurological development, while
	Bettelheim continued to emphasize the role of nurturing during early
	childhood. Nevertheless, many mothers reported that they felt a deep
	sense of anguish and resentment toward child psychiatrists who often
	made them feel as if they were to blame for their children's
	autism.
Early Infantile Autism is a condition that occurs early in life,
	typically diagnosed before the age of two. Eugen Bleuler in
	Switzerland coined the term autism in 1911, referring to behavior
	associated with schizophrenia. Kanner used the term autism as a clinically unique category, rather than a symptom of
	schizophrenia. From the Greek autos meaning self, autism is
	characterized partly by a child's insistence on aloneness and a
	child's desire to maintain sameness in his or her environment. Since
	Kanner's 1943 article "Autistic Disturbances of Affective Contact,"
	evolving diagnostic criteria have affected the rate at which autism
	is diagnosed. Nonetheless, the outward signs of autism can also be
	highly variable. Autistic children may express repetitive and
	restrictive behaviors, obsessively focus on objects, and they often
	throw tantrums when the sameness of their environment is
	disturbed.
Sigmund Freud, who studied abnormal behavior in Austria in the
	early twentieth century, influenced psychiatry, which then aimed to
	offer mental health patients a source of expertise and treatment
	that did not involve medicines. Freud's psychotherapy focused on
	systematically studying the underlying forces that contribute to
	human behavior, or psychodynamics. Central to psychotherapy was the
	presumption that an experienced clinician could help a patient
	elucidate the sources of conflict that underlie the patient's
	behavior.
By the early 1940s psychoanalysts practiced in the US. By 1938,
	the American Psychoanalytic Association in New York City, New York,
	required trainees to have completed at least one year of residency
	in psychiatry. By the early 1940s, some psychoanalytic institutes
	required two years of residency training in psychiatry. In the early
	1950s the vast majority of the members of the American Psychiatric
	Association, which is headquartered in Arlington, Virginia, were
	also members of the American Psychoanalytic Association. By
	requiring their members to become professionally trained
	psychiatrists, psychotherapists legitimated psychoanalysis in the
	US.
Adolf Meyer, a psychiatrist trained in Switzerland in the late
	nineteenth century who then migrated to the US in 1892, was one of
	the early members of the American Psychoanalytic Association and
	director of the clinic where Kanner worked. Meyer's conception of
	psychiatry was based on understanding particular behaviors by
	investigating interactions of an organism in its environment, rather
	than using a dichotomy of whether nature or nurture shaped
	human behavior. He took life histories of patients in his care. In
	1913 Meyer became director of the Henry Phipps Psychiatric Clinic at
	the Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, Maryland. Meyer tended to
	emphasize psychogenic factors in the clinic.
Leo Kanner was trained as a physician at the
	Friedrich-Wilhelm-University, which later became Humboldt University
	in Berlin, Germany. For his thesis in 1920, Kanner studied normal
	heart sounds and their representation in electrocardiograms. After
	working for some time at the Second Medical Clinic at Charité
	Hospital in Berlin, Germany, Kanner joined in 1928 the Henry Phipps
	Psychiatric Clinic at Johns Hopkins Hospital.
	In 1930, Meyer asked Kanner to head
	the first child psychiatry service in the United States at the Henry
	Phipps Psychiatric Clinic. By 1930, psychotherapy informed
	psychiatric practice, and with Meyer's influence, Kanner
	incorporated psychogenic explanations in his early descriptions of
	autism.
In 1938, Kanner began observing eleven child patients at his
	clinic. Each between the ages of two and eight, these children
	exhibited behavior that Kanner considered different from anything
	else reported in psychiatry. Donald, Frederick, Richard,
	Paul, Barbara, Virginia, Herbert, Alfred, Charles, John, and Elaine
	became the first eleven children described with Kanner Syndrome, a
	condition Kanner later called Early Infantile Autism. In 1943,
	Kanner published "Autistic Disturbances of Affective Contact" in
	which he recounted his study of those eleven children. The article
	described behaviors of those children and included descriptions 
	about the background, social standing, and intellectual capabilities
	of their parents.
In the final sections of his 1943 article, Kanner elaborated the
	common features that he had noticed about peculiar behavior and family
	background of the eleven children. Kanner argued that those
	children's autistic withdrawals meant that they were overwhelmed with
	a desire to maintain sameness and aloneness with respect to their
	environment. As for the families, Kanner noted that the children
	came from intelligent families of either Jewish or Anglo-Saxon
	origin, and that the fathers and mothers were not warm to their
	children. Thus, Kanner emphasized emotionally cold parenting as a
	causal explanation for autism, and some called this theory the
	refrigerator mother theory.
After Kanner introduced the theory in 1943, he and others questioned whether or not he had described a
	unique diagnostic category. Bleuler had described autistic
	withdrawal as a symptom of schizophrenia in 1911. Kanner described
	these issues at an annual meeting of psychiatrists in 1948. In his
	1949 article "Problems of Nosology and Psychodynamics of Early
	Infantile Autism," Kanner attempted to justify Early Infantile Autism’s place in psychiatric nosology. While distinguishing autism's dissimilarity to
	other psychiatric conditions, Kanner described parents of patients
	with autism as impassive, mechanical, and absent. Within his 1943
	article, Kanner described parents as unabashedly robotic and
	scientific, as if their children were objects of
	experiments.
Between 1949 and 1954, Kanner's increasingly focused on genetic and congenital factors that predisposed children to develop autism early in life.. At the end of his
	1954 article "To What Extent Is Early Infantile Autism Determined by
	Constitutional Inadequacies?", Kanner discussed biological
	inheritance. By constitutional inadequacy, Kanner meant biological
	inheritance, prenatal organic damage, physical disruption during
	childbirth, and prevalence of boys to girls (a consistent 4 to 1
	ratio) diagnosed with early infantile autism. Although Kanner began
	to consider new theories of autism's etiology, he remained
	dedicated to parental nurturing as a primary cause of autism.
	Nonetheless, Kanner studied inheritance of traits from parents to
	offspring only when parents exemplified autistic behaviors
	themselves. Kanner wrote that parental influence in the first few
	years of life was highly pathogenic and that inheritance simply
	predisposes the child to suffer from emotional refrigeration early
	in life.
Starting in 1959, Kanner began corresponding with Bernard Rimland, an
	experimental psychologist based in San Diego, California, whose son
	Mark, born in 1956, was diagnosed with autism. Rimland began writing
	a review paper on autism. This review paper expanded into a
	book-length work, Infantile Autism: The Syndrome and Its
	Implications for a Neural Theory of Behavior (hereafter
	Infantile Autism), which Rimland submitted as a manuscript to
	the Appleton-Century-Crofts Company, which was headquartered in New
	York City, New York, in 1964 for its annual competition. Kanner
	wrote a complimentary forward for Rimland's book, writing that
	Rimland was a trailblazer in psychology. Rimland's book, set in
	three parts, addressed several controversies about Early Infantile
	Autism, and it attempted to explain the causes of autism.
Chapter three of Rimland's Infantile Autism, titled "The
	Etiology of Infantile Autism: The Problem of Biological versus
	Psychological Causation," refuted the assertion that psychogenic
	factors alone caused Early Infantile Autism. The author stated that
	psychologists uncritically adopted the psychogenic etiology of Early
	Infantile Autism. Rimland reconsidered autism's etiology, emphasizing three main points.
	First, Rimland wrote that causal theories of autism have
	implications for the welfare of children with autism and their
	families, citing factors including shame, guilt, and marital
	discord, which accompany psychogenic etiology. Second, Rimland
	suggested that so long as biologically trained researchers were
	comfortable with the adequacy of psychogenic explanations, there
	would be no reason for them to look further. Finally, Rimland claimed
	that by understanding the etiology of autism, researchers could find
	that human behavior may be more closely linked to biology than
	previously thought.
Rimland's Infantile Autism criticized psychogenic
	arguments for the etiology of autism. Addressing the personalities
	of parents, Rimland mentioned Leon Eisenberg and Kanner's 1956
	article, in which the authors asserted that the emotional environment
	at home plays a role in the genesis of autism. Rimland argued that
	Kanner and Eisenberg did not specify their conclusion, as they did not
	provide evidence. Rimland wrote that their conclusion was a post
	hoc ergo propter hoc fallacy, an error of reasoning whereby one infers a
	cause from a simple correlation of events, without providing 
	evidence of a causal relation. Rimland suggested that alternative biological mechanisms
	could cause autism, citing evidence from studies of the reticular
	formation in the brain.
In 1967 Bruno Bettelheim published The Empty Fortress: Infantile
	Autism and the Birth of the Self. In his book, Bettelheim
	described his experiences as a Jewish man living in Austria from
	1932 to 1938. He wrote that during that time, he had at times two
	autistic children living with him. Bettelheim wrote that his later
	experience as a Jewish captive during World War II gave him insight
	into the kind of introspection that autistic children experience. He
	further compared mothers of the autistic to Nazi prison guards, and he equated 
	the environments they set in their homes to concentration
	camps.
Bettelheim, also a student of Freud's psychoanalysis,
	reelaborated Kanner's theory of psychic causation. Bettelheim
	advocated for removing autistic children from the parent's care, a
	practice called parent-ectomies. Bettelheim argued that biological
	abnormalities in autistic children were effects, and not causes, of
	the disorder and emotionally cold parenting. 
Between 1964 and 1967, Rimland advocated for parents, and he helped
	establish organizations like the National Society for Autistic
	Children (NSAC) in Teaneck, New Jersey, in 1965 to provide support
	and information for parents. In 1967, Rimland helped found the
	Institute for Child Behavioral Research in San Diego, California, to
	advance his goals of finding the cause and developing treatments for
	autism. In 1967, Rimland also co-produced a documentary titled
	The Invisible Wall, which described behaviors associated with
	autism and advanced his theory that autism likely stemmed from both
	genetic and environmental causes.
In 1969, at a Washington D.C. meeting for the National Society for
	Autistic Children, Kanner gave a speech where he stated that he
	acquitted the parents and insisted that the condition of autism was innate. Despite this reversal from Kanner, parents
	of autistic children continued to experience traces of
	psychoanalytic theory in psychiatry clinics across the country.
	Rimland's book Infantile Autism reoriented research in
	psychiatry and psychology toward biology. On 6 April 1979 Donald
	Katz, a journalist in the US, wrote an article highlighting the struggles of autistic children
	and their parents. In this article, Katz credited Rimland for
	rejecting refrigerator mother theory as a myth and for encouraging
	biological research into autism, particularly neurological
	development. 
 Sources Bettelheim,
		Bruno. The Empty Fortress: Infantile Autism and the Birth of the
		Self. New York: Free Press, 1967.
Bleuler, Eugen. Dementia
		praecox oder Gruppe der Schizophrenien. Leipzig: Deuticke, 1911.
Bleuler, Eugen. Dementia Praecox or the
		Group of Schizophrenias. New York: International Universities
		Press, 1950.
Eisenberg, Leon and Leo Kanner. "Childhood
		Schizophrenia - Symposium, 1955–6. Early Infantile Autism,
		1943–55." American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 26 (1956): 556–66.
Grob, Gerald. The Mad Among Us: A History of the Care of
		America's Mentally Ill. New York: The Free Press, 1994.
Kanner,
		Leo. "Autistic disturbances of affective contact." Nervous Child
		2 (1943): 217–50.
Kanner, Leo. "Problems of Nosology and
		Psychodynamics of Early Infantile Autism." American Journal of
		Orthopsychiatry 19 (1949): 416–26.
Kanner, Leo. "To What Extent
		Is Early Infantile Autism Determined by Constitutional
		Inadequacies?" Research publications-Association for Research in
		Nervous and Mental Disease 33 (1954): 378.
Katz, Donald. "The
		Kids with the Faraway Eyes: The Strange Secret World of Autism."
		Rolling Stone, 1979.
Lief, Alfred A. The Commonsense Psychiatry
		of Dr. Adolf Meyer: Fifty-Two Selected Papers. New York:
		McGraw-Hill, 1948.
Mesibov, Gary B., Lynn W. Adams, and Eric
		Schopler. "Autism: A Brief History." Psychoanalytic Inquiry 20
		(2000): 637–47.
Rimland, Bernard. Infantile Autism: The Syndrome
		and Its Implications for a Neural Theory of Behavior. New
		Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1964.
Shorter, Edward. A History of
		Psychiatry: From the Era of the Asylum to the Age of Prozac.
		John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1997.
Silverman, Chloe. Understanding
		Autism: Parents, Doctors, and the History of a Disorder.
Princeton University Press, 2012.
Simpson, David E. Refrigerator
		Mothers. Kartemquin Films, 2003.
		http://www.snagfilms.com/films/title/refrigerator_mothers
		(Accessed April 23, 2014). 
University of Oklahoma. Infantile Autism: The Invisible Wall. Behavioral Sciences Audiovisual Laboratory, University of Oklahoma Medical Center, 1968.


How to cite
Cohmer, Sean, "Early Infantile Autism and the Refrigerator Mother Theory (1943-1970)". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-08-19). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8149.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Monday, August 25, 2014 - 22:25
 Topic
Subject
 Kanner, Leo, 1894-1981; Autism; Autism spectrum disorders; Autism in children; Autistic children; Early infantile autism; Kanner syndrome; Rimland, Bernard, 1928-2006; Meyer, Adolf; Child psychiatry; Bettelheim, Bruno; National Society for Autistic Children (U.S.); Context