By Yawen Zou
Published: 2015-01-26
Keywords:     
   The Germ-Plasm: a Theory of Heredity (1893), by August WeismannFriedrich Leopold August Weismann published Das
	Keimplasma: eine Theorie der Vererbung (The Germ-Plasm: a
	Theory of Heredity, hereafter The Germ-Plasm) while
	working at the University of Freiburg in Freiburg, Germany in 1892.
	William N. Parker, a professor in the University College of South
	Wales and Monmouthshire in Cardiff, UK, translated The
	Germ-Plasm into English in 1893. In The Germ-Plasm,
	Weismann proposed a theory of heredity based on the concept of the
	germ plasm, a substance in the germ cell that carries hereditary information. The
	Germ-Plasm compiled Weismann's theoretical work and analyses of
	other biologists' experimental work in the 1880s, and it provided a
	framework to study development, evolution and heredity. Weismann
	anticipated that the germ-plasm theory would enable researchers to
	investigate the functions and material of hereditary substances.
Prior to publishing The Germ-Plasm, in 1885 Weismann had
	published "The Continuity of the Germ-Plasm as the Foundation of a
	Theory of Heredity." In that essay, Weismann argued that only the
	hereditary substance of the germ cells was inheritable, and that
	cells that derive from all other parts of parents' bodies (soma cells), could not
	transmit from parents to offspring. Compared with the 1885 essay,
	The Germ-Plasm provided hereditary explanations for
	developmental and evolutionary phenomena. The Germ-Plasm has
	an introduction and four parts, divided into fourteen chapters.
In the Introduction of The Germ-Plasm, Weismann provides a
	brief history of hereditary theories before the germ-plasm theory.
	Weismann also gave an account for biologists who had influenced him.
	Before the germ-plasm theory, Herbert Spencer and Charles Darwin,
	both in the UK, had proposed their own theories of heredity.
	 Weismann argues that all the previous theories of heredity,
	including Darwin's theory of pangenesis, were unsatisfactory. In his
	1868 book The Variation of Animals and Plants under
	Domestication, Darwin elaborated the theory of pangenesis based
	on the concept of the gemmules, atomic inheritable substances that
	body cells emit. Darwin stated that gemmules could circulate
	through blood and aggregate into germ cells, but Weismann disagreed
	with Darwin's claim.
In the 1880s, Francis Galton in London modified the pangenesis
	theory, arguing that the circulation of gemmules happened not as Darwin had claimed, but rather on a small
	scale. Then, in 1884, Carl W.von Nägeli in
	Munich, Germany, postulated the concept of idioplasm in his book 
	Mechanico-Physiological Theory of Descent. According to
	Nägeli, idioplasm was a reproductive substance located in the plasm
	of all cells, not just in germ cells. Weismann later said that
	germ-plasm was the idioplasm of the germ cell. 
In part one of The Germ-Plasm, "The Material Basis of Heredity,"
	Weismann describes the constitution and structure of the germ-plasm.
	Weismann postulates that there are four hierarchical levels of
	substances in the cell, and he coins four terms to name them. The
	four levels, from the lowest to the highest one, are biophors,
	determinants, ids, and idants. At the first level are biophors,
	minute units that collectively make up the whole cell, and Weismann postulated that they directed the cell's
	metabolism and growth. Biophors referred to various kinds of
	chemical molecules. At the second level are determinants, which are the
	primary constituents of the hereditary substances, and the biophors determined
	the particular phenotype and variability of a cell. At the third
	level are ids, or aggregates of many determinants. At the highest
	level are idants, which are aggregates of ids. The concept of
	idants corresponded to the concept of chromosomes.
	During an organism's development, ids reduce their number through cell division,
	so the new cells contain fewer ids and determinants than the old
	ones. Weismann claims that only one determinant is active in a body
	cell, and that the other determinants remained inactive, so a cell develops to have only one phenotype. Later in his book, Weismann uses those four
	concepts of biophors, determinants, ids, and idants to explain the hereditary and developmental phenomena in
	various sexual and asexual organisms.
In part two of the book, "Heredity in Its Relation to Monogonic
	Reproduction," Weismann explains phenomena associated with monogenic
	reproduction, or asexual reproduction, which referred to the
	reproduction of a new organism from a single parent. Weismann
	discusses how some asexual organisms can regenerate lost parts, as
 when some animals regrow  body parts bitten off by a 
	predator. Weismann states that the regeneration of an entire
	body part has two possible causes: either cells regenerate lost parts because the cells
	remain young, or they regenerate those parts because they were inactive before the bite. Weismann
	classes those causes as due to supplementary determinants, which he says
	are contained in a developed cell.
Weismann next discusses fission and gemmation, both of which were cellular processes. Fission is a
	 process through which a parent cell divides into two or
	more parts, whereas gemmation is a process during which
	a new part buds from a parent organism, and eventually leaves the
	parent organism as a new organism. Although Weismann concedes that
	fission and gemmation may both arise from regeneration, he
	postulates that they are distinct processes. Weismann argues that
	fission is due to the doubling of determinants. In contrast,
	gemmation is caused when the germ-plasm in particular doubles in a
	fertilized egg. Additionally, Weismann argues that one
	germ-plasm then remains inactive and moves to the bud. The last
	phenomenon Weismann addresses is the formation of germ-cells in
	asexual reproduction, which for Weismann is a process similar to
	gemmation.
In part three of the book, "The Phenomena of Heredity Resulting
	from Sexual Reproduction," Weismann addresses sexual reproduction,
	or reproduction from two parents. Weismann defines the process of amphimixis as the
	fusion of the germ-plasms from two parents. Weismann claims that
	each sex cell only carries half of the idants of a parent, and due
	to the fusion of idants during amphimixis, the idants of germ-plasm in
	the zygote doubles. In his 1885 essay, Weismann had predicted the
	halving of sexual cells, and Theodor Boveri's and Eduard
	Strasburger's 1888 experiments supported Weismann's claim.
	Boveri and Strasburger, in Germany, showed that the number of
	chromosomes of primitive sperm cells reduced to half in sperm cells.
	For Weismann, an offspring's hereditary substances carry half of the ids from
	a paternal cell and the other half from maternal cell, and the collection of both partly explains why
	offspring have traits from each parent. Weismann notes that
	sometimes the offspring resemble traits of one parent more than the
	other, a phenomenon due, according to Weismann, to the competition
	of ids from the two parents during development.
Weismann says that hereditary phenomena are more complicated in
	sexual organisms than in asexual ones, and he devotes much of his
	text to sexual organisms. For example, Weismann describes reversion as a phenomenon according to
	which an offspring's characteristics resemble those of the
	grandparents, or remote ancestors, but are absent in the parents.
	Weismann argues that reversion happens because of  unequal
	allocations of hereditary materials across generations. In reversions, the majority of a
	grandparent's or a remote ancestor's ids pass on to the offspring
	and become prominent in the offspring.
Additionally, Weismann discusses the mechanism for dimorphism,
	the phenomenon of two distinct phenotypes in members of the same
	species. One form of dimorphism Weismann discusses is sexual
	dimorphism, or distinct characteristics in individuals of different
	sexes in the same species. For instance, in tapeworms females are
	bigger than males and look quite different from males. Weismann
	postulates that cells of tapeworms carry both spermatogenetic (male)
	determinants and oogenetic (female) determinants. According to
	Weismann, in male tapeworms, spermatogenetic determinants are active
	whereas oogenetic determinants are inactive, whereas the converse
	held for female tapeworms. Weismann also discusses polymorphism, or
	triple or plural dissimilar phenotypes coexisting within the same
	species, such as in butterflies.
In the fourth part of the book, "The Transformation of Species:
	Its Origin in the Idioplasm," Weismann addresses the issue of
	inheritance of acquired characteristics, and he provides a theory of
	variation. Earlier, Weismann had supported, but later rejected the
	hypothesis that organisms inherit the characteristics that their parents' had acquired
	during their own lifetimes. Acquired characteristics are defined as traits
	acquired through environmental factors, disease, or training during
	the life time of an organism. Earlier scholars such as Jean-Baptiste
	Lamarck, who lived in France in the early nineteenth century,
	proposed that such traits could transmit to the offspring. In The Germ Plasm, Weismann
	rejects the theory and argues that acquired characteristics are
	traits of the soma cells, and the hereditary substances of soma
	cells cannot transmit to the next generation. However, Weismann says
	that environments can influence the process of inheritance by modifying the germ-plasm,
	for example, temperatures can influence butterflies' traits.
Additionally, Weismann elaborates a theory for variation within a
	group of related organisms, claiming that variations in germ-plasm cause
	those groups to evolve. He hypothesizes two causes of variations, the first
	relies on environmental factors, such as nutrients, the second on
	the multiplication of determinants. Weismann further argues that
	external factors are the major causes for variation.
After he published his theories, Weismann modified his theory to respond to critiques. In the 1900s,
	biologist Hugo de Vries in Amsterdam, Netherlands, supported Weismann's
	distinction of soma cells from germ cells, but de Vries defended the theory
	of pangenesis and proposed the theory of intracellular pangenesis.
	According to the intracellular pangenesis theory, the hereditary
	material can only move inside cells, instead of circulating in the
	blood. De Vries engaged a two decades debate with Weismann, who had
	to constantly re-examine his own theory.
	Nevertheless, The Germ-Plasm triggered debates among and influenced
	twentieth century researchers, and Weismann's distinction between germ cells and soma cells became called the Weismann
	barrier.
 Sources Boveri, Theodor. "Ein geschlechtlich erzeugter Organismus
		ohne mü tterliche Eigenschaften." [An Organism Sexually Produced
		without Characteristics of the Mother]. Gesellschaft für
		Morphologie und Physiologie zu München [Munich Society for Morphology and Physiology] 5 (1889): 73–83. https://books.google.com/books/reader?id=_VEVAAAAYAAJ&printsec=frontcover&output=reader&pg=GBS.PA73 (Accessed January 22, 2015).
Churchill, Frederick B. "August Weismann and a break from
		tradition." Journal of the History of Biology 1 (1968): 91–112.
Churchill, Frederick B. "Weismann: the pre-eminent
		neo-Darwinian." Endeavour 27 (2003): 46–7.
Conklin, Edwin G.
		"August Weismann." Proceedings of the American Philosophical
		Society 54 (1915): 3–12. http://www.jstor.org/stable/984111 (Accessed January 22, 2015).
Darwin, Charles. The Variation of
		Animals and Plants under Domestication. London: John Murray,
		1868. https://archive.org/details/variationofan02darw  (Accessed
		May 16, 2013).
De Vries, Hugo. Intracellular Pangenesis. Translated by C. Stuart Gager. Chicago:
		Open Court, 1910.
		http://dx.doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.3778
		(Accessed November 24, 2013).
Galton, Francis. "A Theory of
		Heredity." Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great
		Britain and Ireland (1876): 329–48.  https://archive.org/stream/journalroyalant14irelgoog#page/n350/mode/2up (Accessed January 22, 2015).
Lamarck, Jean–Baptiste
		Pierre Antoine. Philosophie zoologique: ou, Exposition des
		considérations relatives à l'histoire naturelle des animaux.
		[Zoological Philosophy: Exposition with Regard to the Natural
		History of Animals]. Vol 1. Paris: F. Savy, 1873.
		http://dx.doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.26297
		(Accessed November 24, 2013).
Nägeli, Carl.
		Mechanisch-physiologische Theorie der Abstammungslehre
		[Mechanico-Physiological Theory of Descent]. Munich: R.
		Aldenbourg, 1884.
		http://dx.doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.6477
		(Accessed November 24, 2013).
Spencer, Herbert. The Principles
		of Biology. New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1881.
		http://dx.doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.60804
		(Accessed November 24, 2013).
Stanford, P. Kyle. "August
		Weismann's Theory of the Germ-Plasm and the Problem of
		Unconceived Alternatives." History and Philosophy of the Life
		Sciences 27 (2005): 163–99.
Weismann, August. "The Continuity of
		the Germ-Plasm as the Foundation of a Theory of Heredity." (1885). Translated and edited by Edward B. Poulton, Selmar Schönland, and Arthur E. Shipley in
		Essays upon Heredity and Kindred Biological Problems, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1891: 163–256. http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/70640#page/182/mode/1up (Accessed January 22, 2015).
Weismann, August. Das Keimplasma: eine Theorie der Vererbung, 1892. Translated by W.
		Newton Parker and Harriet Rönnfeldt as The Germ-Plasm: a Theory of Heredity.  New York: Scribner, 1893.
		http://dx.doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.25196 (Accessed March 7,
		2014).  

How to cite
Zou, Yawen, "The Germ-Plasm: a Theory of Heredity (1893), by August Weismann". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2015-01-26). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8284.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Monday, January 26, 2015 - 22:26
 Topic
Subject
Heredity; Weismann, August, 1834-1914. Keimplasma. English; Germ Cells; Heredity; University of Freiburg; Inheritance of acquired characters; Somatic cells; Reproduction; Pangenesis; Inheritance (Biology); Boveri, Theodor, 1862-1915; Germ-plasm; Literature