By Alexis Abboud
Published: 2014-12-30
Keywords: endocrine disruptors
 Theodora (Theo) Emily Colborn (1927-2014)Theodora Colborn studied how
	chemicals affect organisms as they develop and reproduce during the twentieth and twenty-first centuries in the US. By the 1940s,	researchers had reported that chemicals from agricultural and industrial processes affected how wild organisms developed, but in 1991, Colborn organized the Wingspread Conference in
	Racine, Wisconsin, at which a group of scientists classed these
	chemicals as environmentally harmful substances. Colborn and her colleagues called those chemicals endocrine disruptors, as they mimic or block the
	body's endocrine system. After scientists labeled  these chemicals
	and showed that they harm humans and wildlife, the US Congress passed
	several acts to regulate these chemicals and to protect both
	wildlife and humans from their harmful effects.
Theodora Emily Colborn was born on 28 March 1927 to Margaret L.
	de Forge Decker and Theodore Decker in Plainfield, New Jersey.
	Colborn later said that as a girl, river water fascinated her. Colborn tended
	not use her given name Theodora, but instead adopted a shortened
	version, Theo. In 1943, Colborn entered Rutgers University in New
	Brunswick, New Jersey, where she graduated with a bachelor of
	science degree in pharmacy in 1947. While at Rutgers, Colborn met Harry R.
	Colborn, a fellow pharmacy student, whom she married on 20 January
	1949, and with whom she had four children.
After graduation, both Colborns worked at a drugstore in Newton,
	New Jersey, that belonged to Harry Colborn's father. After taking
	over the business, the Colborns expanded the drugstore to two other
	locations. Colborn later said that she became disillusioned with the
	profession of pharmacy and did not like prescribing drugs with
	unknown side effects. The Colborns sold their business in
	the early 1960s and moved to Colorado.
In Colorado, the Colborns opened another drugstore and started
	raising sheep. In Colorado, Colborn reignited her interest in rivers
	when she noticed that locals suffered from poor health after
	they drank river water polluted by nearby coal mining. Colborn said
	that the misuse and overuse of water in the western US prompted her
	to enroll in Western State College of Colorado in Gunnison,
	Colorado, in 1978 to study fresh water ecology. That year,
	Colorado governor John D. Vanderhoof appointed Colborn to the
	Colorado National Areas Program, a statewide conservation effort.
	Colborn spent her summers doing field research for her master's
	thesis at the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory in Crested Butte,
	Colorado.
In 1981, Colborn graduated with a master's degree in freshwater
	ecology after she defended her thesis titled "Aquatic insects as
	measures of trace element presence: cadmium and molybdenum". In her
	thesis, Colborn discussed how aquatic insects like mayflies could be
	used to assess the heavy metal pollution of fresh water. Heavy
	metals like cadmium, a common industrial chemical that causes
	cancer, pollute fresh water and harm the wildlife species that drink
	from the water. Colborn, in her thesis, showed that measurements of
	cadmium levels in aquatic insects were more accurate than the
	standard testing measures of the time. In 1982, her thesis was
	published.
Colborn's husband died in 1983, and after graduating from Western
	State College of Colorado, Colborn moved to Madison, Wisconsin,
	where she began her doctorate in zoology at the University of
	Wisconsin, Madison. In 1985, Colborn received her doctoral degree in
	zoology, with minors in epidemiology, toxicology, and water
	chemistry. Her dissertation, "The use of stonefly, Pteronarcys
	californica Newport, as a measure of bioavailable cadmium in
	high altitude river system, Gunnison County, Colorado," built on her
	previous work and measured the amount of metal in aquatic insects as a measure for heavy metal
	pollution in their fresh water ecosystems.
In 1985, Colborn received a US Congressional Fellowship with the
	Office of Technology Assessment in Washington, D.C., where she
	evaluated technologies. At the Office of Technology Assessment,
	Colborn further studied water quality and water quality assessment.
	She continued this work when she began working in 1987 for the Conservation
	Foundation, a think tank in Washington, D.C. At the
	Conservation Foundation, Colborn contributed to a two-year study of the
	Great Lakes drainage basin.
As part of the study, Colborn reviewed literature about research
	on the Great Lakes ecosystem. While reviewing that literature,
	Colborn noted that sixteen animal species that ate fish from the
	lakes suffered from reproductive issues, often bearing abnormal
	young, if they bore any at all. The study culminated with the 1990
	book, written by many members of the research team, including
	Colborn, titled Great Lakes: Great Legacy? The book detailed
	the environmental problems found in the area, including the
	deposition of chemicals like DDT, the deterioration of 80,000 small
	lakes due to acid rain, the loss of wetlands, and the
	high costs of solving those problems.
While at the Conservation Foundation, Colborn studied the chemical pollutants found in the Great Lakes area. She joined
	the World Wildlife Fund in Washington D.C. as a senior fellow in 1988,
	and she began to study the effects of those chemical pollutants. In
	1991, she published a study about the reproductive challenges faced by
	 bald eagles living in the Great Lakes region. In that study,
	Colborn showed that if female eagles were exposured to environmental pollutants
	found in the Great Lakes area, pollutants like pesticide
	dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane (DDT), then the offspring of those eagles were less likely than normal to live long enough to reproduce. She hypothesized that the pollutants affected
	the birds' hormone systems.
Later that year, Colborn organized the Wingspread Conference,
	where she brought together scientists who studied the effects of
	industrial chemicals on ecosystems. The scientists discussed the
	possibility that agricultural and industrial chemicals adversely
	affected organisms through the mimicry or blockage of natural
	hormones in the bodies of those organisms. In 1992, the Wingspread consensus statement
	was published as "Chemically-induced Alterations in Sexual and
	Functional Development: the Wildlife/Human Connection." The
	statement said that agricultural and industrial chemicals
	affected the growth and development of several wildlife species. The
	authors then discussed the effects of the drug diethylstilbestrol in
	women who used it to prevent miscarriages. Physicians prescribed
	diethylstilbestrol to four million women between 1938 and 1971,
	before its use was banned due to its toxic health effects. They
	Wingspread scientists noted similarities between the effects of
	diethylstilbestrol and those of the chemicals, and they concluded
	that many of the chemicals affecting wildlife may have similar
	effects on humans.
In 1993, Colborn published "Developmental effects of
	endocrine-disrupting chemicals in wildlife and humans," along with
	developmental biologist Frederick S. vom Saal and cell biologist Ana
	M. Soto. In that paper, the authors presented twenty years of
	evidence demonstrating the effects that environmental pollutants
	have on wildlife and humans, especially when the exposure takes
	place prenatally, on both the pregnant female and the embryo. The
	authors coined the term endocrine disruptor in this publication.
	Endocrine disruptors refer to those chemicals that cause alterations
	in sexual and functional development through interaction with the
	hormone (endocrine) system of the body.
Later in 1993, Colborn became a senior scientist and director of
	the Wildlife and Contaminants Program for the World Wildlife Fund.
	While at the World Wildlife Fund, Colborn continued to research
	endocrine disruptors and their effects on growth, and she advocated
	for policy reforms to protect humans and wildlife against endocrine
	disruptors.
In 1996, Colborn coauthored a book with environmental journalist
	Dianne Dumanoski and environmental health scientist John Peterson
	Myers. The book, titled Our Stolen Future: Are We Threatening Our
	Fertility, Intelligence, and Survival? A Scientific Detective
	Story, targeted a general audience, and it described 
	endocrine disruptors and their effects on growth and development.
	The book spurred the US Congress to pass two acts that led to the
	creation of the Endocrine Disruptor Screening Program, a program led
	by the Environmental Protection Agency in Washington D.C. to test new
	chemicals for their possible effects on endocrine systems. As of
	2014, the Endocrine Disruptor Screening Program remains the US
	government's sole attempt to regulate endocrine disruptors.
After 1996, Colborn published several articles about possible
	screening methods for endocrine disruptors. She also discovered new
	detrimental effects of endocrine disruptors, including endocrine
	disruptors and their link to hypospadias, a birth defect of the
	urethral opening in males, and to problems in brain development.
After leaving the World Wildlife Foundation in 2003, Colborn
	founded The Endocrine Disruption Exchange (TEDX) in Paonia,
	Colorado. TEDX is a nonprofit organization that focuses on disemminating
	scientific evidence of the effects of low dose exposure to endocrine
	disruptors. TEDX addresses a unique property of endocrine
	disruptors: that they do not require large amounts of a given
	chemical to cause disadvantageous effects in the exposed organism.
	In 2004, Colborn began teaching at the University of Florida in
	Gainesville, Florida.
Colborn won many awards for her work on endocrine disruptors. In
	1994, the National Wildlife Federation awarded her the National
	Conservation Achievement Award in Science. In 1997, the United
	Nations Environment Programme awarded her the Women Leadership in
	the Environment Award. She also received the Asahi Glass
	Foundation's Blue Planet Award in 2000, and the Center for Science
	and the Public Interest's Rachel Carson award in 2004.
In 2009, Colborn left TEDX and the University of Florida and
	moved to Paonia, Colorado. She died on 14 December 2014.
	
 Sources Ankley, Gerald,
		Ellen Mihaich, Ralph Stahl, Donald Tillitt, Theo Colborn,
		Suzanne McMaster, Ron Miller, John Bantle, Pamela Campbell,
		Nancy Denslow, Richard Dickerson, Leroy Folmar, Michael Fry,
		John Giesy, L. Earl Gray, Patrick Guiney, Thomas Hutchinson,
		Sean Kennedy, Vincent Kramer, Gerald LeBlanc, Monte Mayes,
		Alison Nimrod, Reynaldo Patino, Richard Peterson, Richard Purdy,
		Robert Ringer, Peter Thomas, Les Touart, Glen Van Der Kraak, and
		Tim Zacharewski. "Overview of a workshop on screening methods
		for detecting potential (anti‐) estrogenic/androgenic chemicals
		in wildlife." Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 17
		(1998): 687–87. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/etc.5620170110/full (Accessed December 26, 2014). 
Baskin, Laurence S., Katherine Himes, and Theo Colborn.
		"Hypospadias and endocrine disruption: is there a connection?"
		Environmental Health Perspectives 109 (2001): 1175–1183. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1240480/ (Accessed December 26, 2014).
Colborn, Theo. "Aquatic insects as measures of trace element presence in water: Cadmium and molybdenum." In J.G. Pearson, R.B. Foster, W.E. Bishop (eds.), Aquatic Toxicology and Hazard Assessment: Proceedings of the Fifth Annual Symposium on Aquatic Toxicology: a Symposium. Philadelphia, PA: American Society for Testing and Materials, 1982: 316–325.
Colborn, Theo. "Epidemiology of Great Lakes Bald Eagles."
		Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health: Part A
		Current Issues 33 (1991): 395–453.
Colborn, Theo. "Environmental Estrogens: Health Implications
		for Humans and Wildlife." Environmental Health
		Perspectives 103 (1995): 135. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1518892/ (Accessed December 26, 2014).
Colborn, Theo. "Neurodevelopment and endocrine disruption."
		Environmental Health Perspectives (2004): 944–9. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1518892/ (Accessed December 26, 2014).
Colborn, Theo. Email Communications with Embryo Project Encyclopedia Editors. April, 2014.
Colborn, Theo, and Coralie Clement, eds.
		Chemically-Induced Alterations in Sexual and Functional
		Development: the Wildlife/Human Connection. Princeton:
		Princeton Scientific Publishing, 1992.
Colborn, Theo, and Polly Short. "Pesticide use in the US and
		policy implications: a focus on herbicides." Toxicology and
		Industrial Health 15 (1999): 241–76.
Colborn, Theo, Dianne Dumanoski, and John Peterson Myers.
		Our Stolen Future: Are We Threatening our Fertility,
		Intelligence, and Survival? A Scientific Detective Story. New
		York: Penguin Books, 1996.
Colborn, Theo, Frederick vom Saal, and Ana M. Soto.
		"Developmental Effects of Endocrine-Disrupting Chemicals in
		Wildlife and Humans." Environmental Health Perspectives
		101 (1993): 378–84. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1519860/ (Accessed December 26, 2014).
Colborn, Theodora E., Alex Davidson, Sharon N. Green, R.A.
		Hodge, C. Ian Jackson, and Richard A. Liroff. Great Lakes:
		Great Legacy? Ottawa: World Wildlife Fund, 1990.
DeVito, Michael, Lisa Biegel, Abraham Brouwer, Scott Brown,
		Franciose Brucker-Davis, Ann Oliver Cheek, Russ Christensen,
		Theo Colborn, Paul Cooke, James Crissman, Kevin Crofton, Dan
		Doerge, Earl Gray, Peter Hauser, Pamela Hurley, Michael Kohn,
		Jozef Lazar, Suzanne McMaster, Michael McClain, Eugene
		McConnell, Christoph Meier, Ronald Miller, Joseph Tietge, and
		Rochelle Tyl. "Screening methods for thyroid hormone
		disruptors." Environmental Health Perspectives 107
		(1999): 407–415. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1566416/ (Accessed December 26, 2014).
Gray Jr, L. Earl, William R. Kelce, Tom Wiese, Rochelle Tyl,
		Kevin Gaido, Jon Cook, Gary Klinefelter, Daniel Desaulniers,
		Elizabeth Wilson, Tim Zacharewski, Chris Waller, Paul Foster,
		John Laskey, Jerry Reel, John Giesy, Susan Laws, John McLachlan,
		William Breslin, Ralph Cooper, Richard Di Giulio, Rodney
		Johnson, Richard Purdy, Ellen Mihaich, Stephen Safe, Carlos
		Sonnenschein, Wade Welshons, Ron Miller1, Suzanne McMaster, Theo
		Colborn. "Endocrine screening methods workshop report: detection
		of estrogenic and androgenic hormonal and antihormonal activity
		for chemicals that act via receptor or steroidogenic enzyme
		mechanisms." Reproductive Toxicology 11 (1997):
		719–50.
Myers, John Peterson, Frederick S. vom Saal, Benson T.
		Akingbemi, Koji Arizono, Scott Belcher, Theo Colborn, Ibrahim
		Chahoud, D. Andrew Crain, Francesca Farabollini, Louis J.
		Guillette Jr., Terry Hassold, Shuk-mei Ho, Patricia A. Hunt,
		Taisen Iguchi, Susan Jobling, Jun Kanno, Hans Laufer, Michele
		Marcus, John A. McLachlan, Angel Nadal, Jorg Oehlmann, Nicolas
		Olea, Paola Palanza, Stefano Parmigiani, Beverly S. Rubin,
		Gilbert Schoenfelder, Carlos Sonnenschein, Ana M. Soto, Chris E.
		Talsness, Julia A. Taylor, Laura N. Vandenberg, John C.
		Vandenbergh, Sarah Vogel, Cheryl S. Watson, Wade V. Welshons,
		and R. Thomas Zoeller. "Why public health agencies cannot depend
		on good laboratory practices as a criterion for selecting data:
		the case of bisphenol A." Environmental Health
		Perspectives 117 (2009): 309–15. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2661896/ (Accessed December 26, 2014).
Occupational Safety and Health Administration. "Cadmium."
		United States Department of Labor. https://www.osha.gov/
		SLTC/cadmium/ (Accessed December 26, 2014).
Ross, W.A. "Review of Great Lakes: Great Legacy?"
		Canadian Public Policy 18 (1992): 122–123. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3551562 (Accessed December 26, 2014).
The Endocrine Disruption Exchange (2014). http://endocrinedisruption.org (Accessed 26 December 2014).
"Theo Colborn, 1927–2014." The Endocrine Disruptor Exchange. 2014 http://endocrinedisruption.org/about-tedx/theo-colborn (Accessed December 26, 2014). 
Vandenberg, Laura N., Theo Colborn, Tyrone B. Hayes, Jerrold
		J. Heindel, David R. Jacobs Jr, Duk-Hee Lee, Toshi Shioda, Ana
		M. Soto, Frederick S. vom Saal, Wade V. Welshons, R. Thomas
		Zoeller, and John Peterson Myers. "Hormones and
		endocrine-disrupting chemicals: low-dose effects and
		nonmonotonic dose responses." Endocrine Reviews 33
		(2012): 378–455. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3365860/ (Accessed December 26, 2014).
Yount, Lisa. A to Z of Women in Science and Math. New
		York: Infobase Publishing, 2008.  

How to cite
Abboud, Alexis, "Theodora (Theo) Emily Colborn (1927-2014)". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-12-30). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8276.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Tuesday, January 13, 2015 - 21:30
 Topic
Subject
 Colborn, Theo; Colborn, Theodora Emily; Endocrine disruptors; Endocrine disrupting chemicals; Environmental endocrine disrupters; Endocrine disrupters; Pollutants; Endocrine Disruptor Screening Program; Endocrine toxicology; endocrine system; endocrines; World Wildlife Fund; Great Lakes Region (North America); Eagles; Vom Saal, Frederick S.; Colorado; People