By Adam R. Navis
Published: 2007-10-30
Keywords: Mice, Nerve growth factor
 Purification of a Nerve-Growth Promoting Protein from the Mouse Salivary Gland and its Neuro-Cytoxic Antiserum
Stanley Cohen published “Purification of a Nerve-Growth Promoting Protein from the Mouse Salivary Gland and its Neuro-Cytoxic Antiserum” in the Proceedings of the National Academies of Sciences in 1960.  This paper outlined the successful purification and identification of 
		NGF (NGF) as a protein, the developmental effects of depriving an embryo of 
		NGF, and the discovery that 
		NGF is also required for the maintenance of the nervous system.

		Cohen built on previous work by 
		Rita Levi-Montalcini, 
		Viktor Hamburger, and himself.  High quantities of 
		NGF were found in 
		snake venom so it was hypothesized that the salivary glands of other animals may also contain 
		NGF.  This led to the discovery of 
		NGF activity in mammals.  This experiment marks the successful purification of 
		NGF as a mammalian protein and identifies the effects of deprivation of 
		NGF.
Much of 
		Cohen’s paper is concerned with the biochemistry related to the isolation of 
		NGF.  
		Cohen isolated 
		NGF from the salivary glands of adult male Swiss 
		mice.  The purified 
		NGF was then assayed on the sensory ganglia from 8 and 9 day 
		chick embryos in a 
		hanging drop tissue culture.  In the process of isolation, 
		Cohen made an observation that male 
		mice have much more 
		NGF than similar females.  This was an indication of possible multiple roles for 
		NGF, although related experiments were decades away.

		Cohen focused on determining the identity and properties of 
		NGF in this paper.  Once the growth factor was isolated, he introduced pepsin and chemotrypsin.  These are enzymes which degrade proteins, destroying the activity of the protein.  Chemotrypsin destroyed ninety-five percent of the biological activity, and pepsin destroyed fifty percent of the 
		NGF activity.  In the presence of these two enzymes, the 
		NGF was inactivated providing strong evidence that the growth factor was a protein.
Further evidence that 
		NGF was a protein came from 
		rabbit antibodies.  
		Mouse 
		NGF was injected into the footpads of two 
		rabbits.  The immune response of these 
		rabbits produced antibodies to 
		mouse 
		NGF.  The antibodies were delivered to 
		chick embryos by injecting 
		rabbit antiserum directly into the 
		chick embryo.  Control experiments revealed no adverse effects from 
		rabbit serum without antibodies to 
		NGF.  The ganglia of the 
		chick embryo subjected to the 
		NGF antibodies were atrophied and much of the 
		chick nervous system had been destroyed by a deprivation of 
		NGF.
The 
		rabbit sympathetic ganglia had also been damaged upon injection of 
		mouse 
		NGF.  This indicated that the antibodies produced by the 
		rabbit immune system against mouse 
		NGF were also specific to 
		rabbit 
		NGF.  
		Cohen made a new conclusion; 
		NGF was required for the normal maintenance of sympathetic ganglia.  
		Levi-Montalcini performed a more detailed investigation of these effects, and published the results in two papers in the same issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

		Mouse 
		NGF was compared to the 
		NGF from 
		snake venom to determine the similarity between the growth factors.  An earlier 
		Cohen paper determined the molecular weight of 
		snake venom 
		NGF to be much lower than the molecular weight of 
		mouse salivary gland 
		NGF identified in this paper.  The 
		mouse salivary 
		NGF had a ten times higher activity than the 
		snake venom 
		NGF, indicating that the 
		mouse 
		NGF was more similar to 
		chick 
		NGF than the 
		snake 
		NGF.  The 
		snake 
		NGF did not respond similarly to the 
		rabbit antibodies, indicating differences in protein structure.  
		Mouse and 
		chick 
		NGF were determined to be more similar to each other than the 
		snake venom 
		NGF.
The purified 
		NGF was found to be very effective in stimulating the growth of the nervous system in developing embryos.  
		Cohen used quantitative chemical changes to identify stimulation of the ganglia.  He observed marked increases in DNA, RNA, and protein concentration in the ganglia tissue.  This indicated an increase in the growth functions of the cells.  Injections of 
		mouse salivary gland extract showed an increase in many developmental milestones: the eyes opened early, the teeth erupted early, and hair growth was stunted. This study identified many important properties of 
		NGF.  
		Cohen showed that 		
		NGF was required for 
		neural development and maintenance of the nervous system and characterized 
		NGF as a protein.

Sources
Cohen, Stanley. “Purification of a Nerve-Growth Promoting Protein from the Mouse Salivary Gland and its Neuro-Cytotoxic Antiserum.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 46 (1960): 302–11.


How to cite
Navis, Adam R., ""Purification of a Nerve-Growth Promoting Protein from the Mouse Salivary Gland and its Neuro-Cytoxic Antiserum" (1960), by Stanley Cohen". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2007-10-30). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/1713.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
© Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Wednesday, March 18, 2015 - 16:37
 Topic
Subject
Nerve Growth Factor; Cohen, Stanley, 1937-; Experiment