By Zane Bartlett
Published: 2015-02-11
Keywords: telomeres, aging, Olovikov, UC Berkeley, senescence
 Telomeres and Telomerase in Cellular Aging (Senescence) 


// 
// 
	

	 Telomeres are bits of DNA on the ends of chromosomes that
	protect chromosomes from sticking to each other or tangling, which
	could cause DNA to abnormally function. As cells replicate,
	telomeres shorten at the end of chromosomes, and this process
	correlates to senescence or cellular aging. Integral to this process
	is telomerase, which is an enzyme that repairs telomeres and is
	present in various cells in the human body, especially during human
	growth and development. Telomeres and telomerase are required for
	normal animal development because they protect DNA as it duplicates
	copies of itself.
In 1965, Leonard Hayflick's research at the Wistar Institute in
	Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, showed the limit to which cells
	duplicate themselves before aging. Hayflick established what became
	called the Hayflick limit,which states that a cell can divide forty
	to sixty times before it cannot divide further and begins to age. In
	the 1970s, scientists researched telomeres. Elizabeth Blackburn
	studied telomeres while she worked at Yale University in New Haven,
	Connecticut. Alexey Olovnikov in Russia related telomeres to
	cellular aging and to the Hayflick Limit. Although Blackburn had
	helped discover telomeres in 1975, two years before, in 1973,
	Olovnikov had hypothesized the existence of telomerase, the length
	of telomeres, and their connections to cellular aging in his study
	on the Hayflick Limit. Unaware of Olovnikov's research, Blackburn
	and Joseph G. Gall independently found a repetitive sequence of DNA
	at the end of chromosomes of the yeast, Tetrahymena
	thermophila. Blackburn and Gall published the results of
	their research in 1978. In 1982 Blackburn, then at the University of
	California in Berkeley, California, collaborated with Jack W.
	Szostak at the Harvard Medical School in Boston, Massachusetts.
	The pair isolated and cloned telomeres in Tetrahymena DNA. Blackburn,
	with the help of her student Carol Greider, then identified
	telomerase in 1984 and isolated it from Tetrahymena in 1989
	Blackburn, Jack Szostak, and Carol Greider received the Nobel Prize
	in Physiology or Medicine in 2009 for their work to identify
	and isolate telomeres and telomerase.
Blackburn and others found that cells age when the
	length of the telomeres in the cells shortens. Each time a cell
	replicates itself, the end of a strand of DNA or the telomere shrinks in
	length. The telomeres shrink across replications because the enzyme
	that replicates DNA, DNA polymerase, only works in one specific
	direction on the DNA strand. It creates what is called a leading and
	a lagging strand of duplication. The leading strand receives its
	name because DNA polymerase constantly moves in one direction and
	replicates the DNA until it completes the strand of DNA without any breaks. The lagging
	strand is composed of individual fragments of DNA created by DNA
	polymerase, called Okazaki fragments, that are later sealed together
	by the enzyme DNA ligase to create one continuous strand. The name
	lagging strand derives from the fact that it lags behind the leading
	strand since lagging or leading strand can take longer to seal
	together the individual DNA fragments. The DNA polymerase detaches
	from DNA at the end of a lagging strand and leaves a space that
	measures a few nucleotides in length. Telomerase normally fills in
	the gap at the end of the DNA after the polymerase detaches from
	it.
Telomerase, the enzyme that repairs telomeres, exists in high
	quantities in developing organisms and in embryonic stem cells. Some
	cells have higher amounts of telomerase activity than do others. As
	a human develops and cells replicate with greater frequency, excess
	telomerase is used and is later replenished only in minute
	quantities. At the end of the process of DNA
	replication, without telomerase to fill in the gaps of a new DAN strand, telomeres shorten with each cellular division.
	According to Blackburn, the Hayflick Limit is a result of
	decreased telomere length. Decreased telomere length also leads to
	chromosomal abnormalities that result in mutations in the genetic
	code, mutations that can cause cancer and further aging in humans.
	However, too much telomerase can also lead to cancer by helping
	cells to become functionally immortal by avoiding the Hayflick Limit. Immortal cells can carry
	mutations in unrepaired areas of the DNA, and they pass the
	cancerous mutations to other cells through replication.
Scientists continued researching telomerase, telomere activity,
	and cellular aging after Blackburn's experiments in the
	1980s. Scientists studied how environmental factors could affect the
	length of telomeres and, consequently, cellular aging. In 2008,
	Geraldine Aubert and Peter Langsdorp at the Terry Fox Laboratory in
	Vancouver, Canada, published research showing that cells replicate
	in response to mutations in the genetic code or in response to stress. Aubert and
	Langsdorp showed that a cell will replicate to attempt to
	repair damaged DNA and, in turn, will shorten the telomeres.
In 2012, Blackburn, Jue Lin, and Elissa Epel at the University of
	California in San Francisco, California, showed the influence of lifestyle on the length of telomeres and
	cellular aging in humans. They found that stress, nutrition, and
	personality influence the length of telomeres and telomerase enzyme
	activity. They defined stress as adverse life events such as death
	in the family or chronically sick children, and they found that
	personality also influences how a person perceives stressful events.
	The authors noted that those who perceived events as less
	stressful than what the researchers expected had longer telomere
	lengths compared to individuals who perceived events as more
	stressful than what researchers expected. Behaviors such
	as smoking or eating processed meats also correlated with shorter than normal
	telomere lengths. Also, those who took vitamin C or E
	supplements had longer than normal telomere lengths. The results of
	Blackburn and her team's experiment verified that environmental
	factors affect the length of telomeres.
 Some people have criticized telomere research. Harry Rubin, at the University of
	California in Berkeley argued that researchers who studied telomeres in relation to cancer sometimes produce suspect data.
	Others argued that scientists pay too much attention on
	telomere research when they should also study other factors involved
	in the cell cycle. 
 Sources Aubert,
		Geraldine, and Peter M. Langsdorp "Telomeres and aging."
		Physiological Reviews 88 (2008): 557–79. http://physrev.physiology.org/content/physrev/88/2/557.full.pdf (Accessed February 17, 2015). 
Blackburn, Elizabeth H., and Joseph G. Gall. "A tandemly
		repeated sequence at the termini of the extrachromosomal
		ribosomal RNA genes in Tetrahymena." Journal of Molecular
		Biology 120 (1978): 33–53.
Greider, Carol W., and Elizabeth H. Blackburn. "A telomeric
		sequence in the RNA of Tetrahymena telomerase required for
		telomere repeat synthesis." Nature 337 (1989):
		331–7.
Hayflick, Leonard. "The limited in vitro lifetime of human
		diploid cell strains." Experimental Cell Research 37
		(1965): 614–36.
Hayflick, Leonard, and Paul S. Moorhead. "The serial
		cultivation of human diploid cell strains." Experimental Cell
		Research 25 (1961): 585–621.
Jiang, Lijing. "Degeneration in Miniature: History of Cell
		Death and Aging Research in the Twentieth Century" PhD diss.,
		Arizona State University, 2013. http://repository.asu.edu/
		attachments/114558/content/ Jiang_asu_0010E_13292.pdf
		(Accessed June 6, 2014).
Lin, Jue, Elissas Epel, and Elizabeth Blackburn. "Telomeres
		and lifestyle factors: roles in cellular Aging." Mutation
		Research 730 (2012): 85–9.
Nobel Prize. "The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
		2009." Nobel Media. http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates
		/2009/ (Accessed October 5, 2013).
Olovnikov, Alexey M. "A theory of marginotomy. The
		incomplete copying of template margin in enzymic synthesis of
		polynucleotides and biological significance of the phenomenon."
		Journal of Theoretical Biology 41 (1973): 181–90.
Rubin, Harry. "Telomerase and cellular lifespan: ending the
		debate?" Nature Biotechnology 16 (1998): 396–7.
Strauss, Evelyn. "Albert Lasker Award for Special
		Achievement in Medical Science." Lasker Foundation. http://www.laskerfoundation.org/awards/2006_s_description.
		htm (Accessed October 20, 2013).
Szostak, Jack W., and Elizabeth H. Blackburn. "Cloning yeast
		telomeres on linear plasmid vectors." Cell 29 (1982):
		245–55.  

How to cite
Bartlett, Zane, "Telomeres and Telomerase in Cellular Aging (Senescence)". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2015-02-11). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8301.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Thursday, February 19, 2015 - 18:18
 Topic
Subject
telomere; Telomerase; Blackburn, Elizabeth H.; Greider, Carol W.; Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology; Aging; DNA; Chromosomes; Yeast; Stem cells; embryonic stem cells; Concept