By Troy Cox
Published: 2014-01-28
Keywords: Sex-Related Gene On Y, Sex Determination Processes
 Male Development of  Chromosomally Female Mice Transgenic for Sry gene (1991), by Peter Koopman, et al.Early 1990s research conducted by Peter  Koopman, John Gubbay, Nigel Vivian, Peter Goodfellow, and Robin Lovell-Badge,  showed that chromosomally female (XX) mice embryos can develop as male with the  addition of a genetic fragment from the Y chromosome of male mice. The genetic  fragment contained a segment of the mouse Sry gene, which is analogous to the human SRY gene. The researchers sought to  identify Sry gene as the gene that produced the testis determining factor protein (Tdf protein in  mice or TDF protein in humans), which initiates the formation of testis. Koopman's team published their results in 1991 in "Male Development  of Chromosomally Female Mice Transgenic for Sry gene."  Their results showed that Sry gene partly  determines the sex of an embryo and is the only gene on the Y chromosome  necessary for initiation of male development in mice.
The researchers conducted the Sry gene experiment on mice at the  Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, MRC National Institute for Medical  Research in London, England, in conjunction with the Human Molecular Genetics  Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund also in London. Koopman and his  colleagues had previously worked to identify the gene or genes present on the Y  chromosome that partly determine the sex of embryos. Their work had led them to  identify a region of the Y chromosome containing the Sry gene as a candidate for primary sex determination due to the  gene's high degree of similarity among several mammalian species.
Additional support for the claim that Sry genes were the primary sex determining gene  came from researchers Ralf Jäger, Philippe Berta, and their early 1990s colleagues. The researchers  independently published findings from genetic testing of genetically male (XY) humans  who developed as females due to either a change in the open reading frame of  the gene (frameshift mutation), or a deletion of the region on the Y chromosome  containing the SRY gene. The findings provided evidence for SRY gene as  a primary sex determining gene, as the loss of function or the absence of the  gene in chromosomally male humans resulted in the development of female sex traits in those humans. Furthermore  the evidence prompted the MRC team to investigate the Sry gene as the only gene necessary in the sexual determination of  mice. The team theorized  that if Sry gene was the primary sex  determining gene, then introduction of the gene into chromosomally female embryos  (XX) could initiate the development of male sex characteristics in adult mice. 
To determine the functional role of the Sry gene, the MRC research team introduced a  sequence containing the Sry gene into  mice embryos during early embryonic development. The team used a small genetic  fragment from the Y chromosome, which contains about fifty-eight million base  pairs. The fragment was fourteen kilobase pairs long and contained the Sry gene with small sequences of DNA on  either side of the Sry gene. The  small sequences of DNA contained regions that researchers hypothesized as regulators of Sry gene expression  during development. Koopman and colleagues obtained the genetic fragments by  cutting DNA from the Y chromosome with several enzymes that cut DNA at specific  sequences, called restriction endonucleases. The team injected numerous mouse  embryos, both male (XY) and female (XX) with the Sry gene fragments and implanted the embryos into the reproductive tracts of adult female mice.
The team examined 158 embryos after  fourteen days of development for signs of sex reversal from female to male development.  First, the researchers looked for the formation of the testis-cord, an early  structure in developing male embryos. The presence of the testis cord in  embryos signals the sex differentiation has occurred. The team then stained for  sex chromatin in amnion cells, which surround the embryos, to determine  the chromosomal or genetic makeups of the embryos. The team also  analyzed the embryos for presence of the Y-linked gene Zfy-1 to identify the chromosomal sex of the organisms. Since the Zfy-1 gene is normally present on the Y chromosome, female mice  that developed as males would not contain this gene and therefore must be  chromosomally XX. 
Of the 158 embryos that the researchers  analyzed, most developed as either male containing XY chromosomes or female  containing XX chromosome. Two of the embryos were found to be transgenic XX  males, or embryos that should have developed as females. These two embryos  contained many copies of the Sry gene.  A histological examination revealed that the testis-cord formation was normal  and indistinguishable from that of normal XY embryos. Furthermore, a total of six  XX females contained Sry gene in low  amounts but developed normally as females. The production of male  development in two XX embryos confirmed the claim that Sry gene alone could initiate testis development in embryos.
To further investigate the role of Sry gene in in the development of sex characteristics, the  researchers allowed ninety-three of the embryos containing injected Sry gene sequences to fully develop to birth. Five of the animals were  confirmed to be transgenic, containing the Sry gene from a separate organism. Two of the animals were XY males, and therefore  not informative for this study. One of the transgenic mice lacked a chromosome (X0), but it developed male phenotypes such as testes and a penis. The X0 male  mouse was similar in size and weight to a normal XY mouse. The X0 male also  displayed normal copulation behavior, but due to the lack of a Y chromosome, the  mouse could not generate sperm and was sterile. The scientists examined  sections of the testes and noted that the testes exhibited normal development  of the sexual reproduction tract except that there were no cells making sperm.  The observation of male development in the absence of a second sex chromosome further  supported the Sry gene as the gene that produced  the testis determining factor protein (Tdf).
The final two transgenic mice were (XX)  females whose DNA sequences contained several copies of the Sry gene. To explain this phenomenon the team proposed two theories. One theory stated that the female mice expressed mosaicism for the Sry gene, meaning that the Sry gene present in the cells of the genital ridge  differed from the sequence that was originally inserted, and thus may have lacked  the regulatory sequences of the gene. Changes in the Sry gene may have occurred through mitotic recombination  during development. The researchers' second theory stated that the location  of the transgenic Sry gene fragment  in the embryo differed from that of animals showing sex reversal, and that this  difference affected Sry gene  expression during development. To the scientists, the development of the X0  male, and the male development of genetically female mice embryos, showed that  the Sry gene was the only gene  necessary to initiate the development of male sex characteristics in mice.
Having identified the Sry gene as the primary sex determining  gene in mice, the team examined the function of the human analog, the SRY gene.  Koopman's team injected a twenty five kilobase sequence containing the human SRY  gene into mice. The difference in size of the sequence reflected the  increased length of the human gene. The team tested whether the nucleotide  sequences of the mouse Sry gene and the human SRY gene were interchangeable across species.  One of the researchers, Gubbay, had previously shown the two genes to be  similar, despite the differences of twenty-three of their seventy-nine total  amino acids. Koopman and colleagues produced two lines of mice offspring  containing the human SRY gene. No transgenic XX females developed as males nor  displayed any evidence of altered sexual reproductive tracts. A third line of  offspring produced only a single XX transgenic female that again developed  normally as a female. The team concluded that the integration of the human SRY gene  could not create a sex reversal in genetically female mice, either because  it was unable to be transcribed into a protein or it produced non-functional  proteins within mice, resulting in normal development in transgenic mice.
"Male Development of Chromosomally  Female Mice Transgenic for Sry gene";  reports the conclusions of Koopman and colleagues that a fourteen kilobase  fragment containing Sry gene can  initiate testicular formation, and thus sex determination in mice. The data  showed that the genetic fragment contained both the entire Sry gene and all of the regulatory elements required for its  expression in the embryo. The results also suggested that scientists could  further analyze genes used in sex determination through the  gradual elimination of sequences from the original fragment to determine the  function of each sequence. The experiment identified Sry gene as a sex determining gene in mice. 

Sources
Berta,  Phillippe, J. Ross Hawkins, Andrew H. Sinclair, Anne Taylor, Beatrice L.  Griffiths, Peter N. Goodfellow, and Marc Fellous. "Genetic Evidence  Equating SRY and the Testis-Determining Factor." Nature 348 (1990): 448–50. 
Gilbert,  Scott. Developmental Biology. 8th  ed. Sunderland: Sinauer, 2006.
Gubbay,  John, Jerome Collignon, Peter Koopman, Blanche Capel, Androulla Economou,  Andrea Munsterberg,  Nigel Vivian, Peter Goodfellow, and Robin Lovell-Badge. "A Gene Mapping to the  Sex-determining Region of the Mouse Y Chromosome is a Member of a Novel Family  of Embryonically Expressed Genes." Nature 346 (1990): 245–50.
Jäger,  Ralf J., Maria Anvret, Kerstin Hall, and Gerd Scherer. "A Human XY Female With  a Frame  Shift Mutation in the Candidate Testis-determining Gene SRY Gene." Nature 348 (1990):  452–4.
Koopman,  Peter, Andrea Munsterberg, Blanche Capel, Nigel Vivian, and Robin Lovell-Badge. "Expression of a Candidate  Sex-determining Gene during Mouse Testis Differentiation." Nature 348  (1990): 450–2. 
Koopman,  Peter, John Gubbay, Nigel Vivian, Peter Goodfellow, and Robin Lovell-Badge.  "Male Development  of Chromosomally Female Mice Transgenic for Sry gene." Nature 351 (1991): 117–21.
Sinclair,  Andrew H., Philippe Berta, Mark S. Palmer, J. Ross Hawkins, Beatrice L. Griffiths, Matthijs J. Smith, Jamie W. Foster, Anna-Maria Frischauf, Robin Lovell-Badge, and Peter  N. Goodfellow. "A Gene From the Human Sex-determining Region Encodes a Protein  with Homology to a Conserved DNA-binding Motif." Nature 346 (1990): 240–4.


How to cite
Cox, Troy, ""Male Development of  Chromosomally Female Mice Transgenic for Sry gene" (1991), by Peter Koopman, et al.". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-01-28). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/7515.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Tuesday, December 16, 2014 - 23:17
 Topic
Subject
Genes, sry; Sex-Determining Region Y Protein; Y chromosome; Testis; Koopman, Peter; Embryos; Chromosomes; Sex chromosomes; Sex determination, Genetic; Sex differentiation; Human chromosomes; Experiment