By M. Elizabeth Barnes
Published: 2014-07-24
Keywords: orthogensis
 Edward Drinker Cope's Law of Acceleration of GrowthThe Law of Acceleration of Growth is a theory proposed by
Edward Drinker Cope in the US during the nineteenth century. Cope developed it in an attempt to explain
the evolution of genera by appealing to changes in the developmental
timelines of organisms. Cope proposed this law as an additional theory
to natural selection. He argued that the evolution of genera, the more
general groups within which biologists group species, occurs when the
individuals in a species move through developmental stages faster than
did their ancestors, but within the same fixed period of gestation, and
thus can undergo new developmental stages and develop new traits. The
Law of Acceleration compliments Cope's Law of Retardation of Growth. He
described the later law as the process by which organisms revert to an
ancestral stage. In these cases, forces suppress the most recent traits
or stages common to the development of individuals from different
species within the same genus. Cope described evolution as progressive and following a predetermined path, a perspective about evolution sometimes called orthogenetic. Cope's was
one among many orthogenic theories in the second half of the nineteenth
century. Furthermore, the theory was part of a trend in the nineteenth
century in which some biologists claimed that the changes in developmental timing of
organisms could explain large changes in biological forms throughout
natural history.
Cope worked in the US
studying a range of subjects including reptiles, fossils, and the
processes by which evolution occurs. He lived from 1840 to 1897 in
Pennsylvania, where he was a professor 
at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. Upon publication in 1859 of Charles Darwin's On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection,
many scientists found the evidence for evolution and common ancestry of
animals compelling, but they debated Darwin's proposed mechanism by which
evolution occurs: natural selection. Additionally, scientists debated
whether or not evolution was progressive or undirected. Many scientists
noted a parallel between the development of an organism and the
evolution of their species, called the law of parallelism, and some
attempted to explain this phenomenon. Cope aimed to address these issues
with the Law of Acceleration. He claimed that the mechanism of evolution
was predetermined and progressive.
Cope first proposed the Law of
Acceleration in "On the Origin of Genera" published in 1868. He defended
the theory that species evolved, but rejected the mechanism of natural
selection as the sole process by which the larger, genus level changes
occurred. He claimed that natural selection can only eliminate the
unfit, but cannot create more fit individuals. He argued that there was
no satisfactory theory of how variation arises. The theory of natural
selection presupposes that variation of individuals arises
randomly, but the Law of Acceleration, as described in "On the Origin of
Genera," claims that the variations of individuals on which natural
selection acts are those traits added to the end of the each
individual's development in an entire species. According to Cope's Law,
development of fetal and infant individuals within a species can speed
up with evolution, so that the individual moves through developmental
stages more rapidly and there is time for new traits to be added at the
end of the development process. Cope argued that a creator determined
which genera would develop more rapidly and therefore accrue more
traits. In this view, acceleration of development is a directed process
determined by God.
 During the second half of the nineteenth century,
scientists increasingly tried to describe the world in purely
naturalistic terms. This effort put pressure on Cope to find a natural
mechanism for evolution of genera, rather than a supernatural one. Cope
therefore changed the Law of Acceleration to incorporate a natural cause
for variation of individuals within a genera. In 1871, he published "The
Laws of Organic Development" and revised his Law of Acceleration by
attributing variation and acceleration of individuals within a genera to
guided forces internal to those individuals. For instance, the wants,
desires, and movements of organisms could guide the changes in their
forms. The internal force, which Cope called bathmism, enabled the acceleration of developmental processes and the addition of
characters to organisms at the end of developmental processes.
Other biologists in the US held
similar theories as Cope, including Alpheus Hyatt at Boston
University in Boston, Massachusetts, and Alpheus Packard at
Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island. Both Hyatt and Packard
were influenced by the theistic biological theories of Louis Agassiz at Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Moreover,
many of those scientists argued that evolution is determined and
progressive, or orthnogenic. Cope claimed that Darwin's concept of natural
selection could only account for the small superficial changes between
species, not for the large changes between genera. According to Cope, Darwin had correctly identified natural selection as the
cause of species, but acceleration of the developmental process of
individuals causes the larger changes between genera.
Cope's Law of
Acceleration was one of many theories constructed in the second half of
the nineteenth century that aimed to describe evolution as acting by
different mechanisms other than natural selection. For instance, in 1866
Ernst Haeckel in Germany published on his biogenetic law, which argued
that as an organism within a species develops, its stages replay the
adult stages of individuals in those species from which the organism's
species evolved. Hyatt and Packard produced similar theories, but their theories differed
from Cope's in the emphasis placed on natural selection, the origin of
variability, and whether or not there was predetermined progress in
evolution.
 Cope's Law of Acceleration lost support when scientists
rediscovered and confirmed Gregor Mendel's principles of genetics in
the first decade of the twentieth century. When Cope composed his law,
scientists could not explain how offspring inherited traits from their
parents. With the rediscovery of Mendel's principles, biologists
discovered that heredity occurs by the transmission of discrete genetic
traits from both parents to their offspring, and that mutation and the
recombination of the genetic code can cause novel traits in the
offspring of organisms. With Mendel's framework, biologists doubted that
evolution occurred by changes arising simultaneously in all individuals
of a species, as Cope's law had proposed. 
 Sources Agassiz, Louis.
		The Classification of Insects from Embryological Data.
		Washington: Smithsonian institution, 1850.
		http://dx.doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.32965 (Accessed April 30,
		2014).
Bowler, Peter J. "Edward Drinker Cope and the Changing Structure of
Evolutionary Theory." Isis 68 (1977): 249–65. 
Bowler, Peter J.
Evolution: The History of an Idea. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1983. 
Bowler, Peter J. The Eclipse of Darwinism: Anti-Darwinian
Evolution Theories in the Decades around 1900. John Hopkins University
Press, 1983. 
Cope, Edward. "On the Origin of Genera." Proceedings of the
Academy of Natural Sciences 20 (1868): 242–300.
http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/75034#page/67/mode/1up (Accessed
April 28, 2014).
Cope, Edward. "The Laws of Organic Development." The American Naturalist
5 (1871): 593–608. http://biodiversitylibrary.org/page/40870569
(Accessed April 30, 2014).
Darwin, Charles. On the Origins of Species by Means of Natural Selection. London: John Murray, 1859.
http://dx.doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.68064 (Accessed April 30, 2014).
"Edward Drinker Cope." Encyclopedia Britannica Online.
http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/136500/Edward-Drinker-Cope.
(Accessed April 30, 2014).
Gould, Stephen J. Ontogeny and Phylogeny. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1977.
Haeckel, Ernst. Generelle Morphologie der Organismen. [General
Morphology of the Organisms]. Berlin: G. Reimer, 1866.
http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/22319#page/11/mode/1up (Accessed
April 30, 2014).
Hyatt, Alpheus. Genesis of the Arietidae. Washington: Smithsonian
Institution, 1889. http://dx.doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.65638 (Accessed
April 30, 2014).
Mendel, Gregor Johann. "Versuche über Pflanzen-Hybriden" [Experiments
Concerning Plant Hybrids]" [1866]. In Verhandlungen des naturforschenden
Vereines in Brünn [Proceedings of the Natural History Society of Brünn]
IV (1865): 3–47. Reprinted in Fundamenta Genetica. Prague: Czech Academy of Sciences, 1966: 15–56.
http://www.mendelweb.org/Mendel.html (Accessed April 30, 2014).
Packard, Alpheus. Lamarck, the Founder of Evolution: His Life and Work.
New York: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1901.
http://dx.doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.12263 (Accessed April 30, 2014).
 

How to cite
Barnes, M. Elizabeth, "Edward Drinker Cope's Law of Acceleration of Growth". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-07-24). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8067.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Wednesday, August 6, 2014 - 18:45
 Topic
Subject
Growth and Development; Development; Evolution; Cope, E. D. (Edward Drinker), 1840-1897; Genus; University of Pennsylvania; Concept