By Dorothy Haskett
Published: 2014-07-24
Keywords: mitochondrial eve, mitochondrial DNA, DNA restriction maps
 Allan Charles Wilson (1934-1991)Allan C. Wilson studied genes, proteins, and body
	structures of animals and humans in the US during the second half of
	the twentieth century. Wilson also studied human evolution. Although
	morphology and behaviors of humans (Homo sapiens)
	and great apes differ, Wilson found that they have
	biochemical and genetic similarities. Wilson and his colleagues
	calculated the time period of humans' and African apes' common
	ancestor. Wilson and his team also studied DNA outside of the
	nucleus in the cellular energy producing particles, called mitochondrial DNA
	(mtDNA), to study when different human groups evolved from each
	other.
Wilson was born on 18 October 1934 in Ngaruawahia, New Zealand, to
	Eunice B. Wood and Charles Wilson. Wilson grew up on a cattle ranch
	in Pukekohe, New Zealand, with his sister Coleen, and his brother
	Gary. He attended secondary school at King’s College in Auckland,
	New Zealand. There, he met Campbell P. McMeekan, who advised Wilson
	to study biochemistry and go to Otago University in Dunedin, New
	Zealand. Wilson obtained a undergraduate degree in biochemistry from
	Otago University in 1955. After graduating, he left New Zealand for
	the University of Washington in Pullman, Washington, where in 1957
	he received a Master’s of Science degree in zoology with the supervision of Donald
	Farner, and Wilson received a PhD in 1961 in biochemistry from the
	University of California at Berkeley with Arthur Pardee as an
	advisor.
Wilson married Leona Greenbaum on 13 September 1958, and they 
	had two children, a daughter Ruth and a son David. After
	postdoctoral work from 1961 to 1964 at Brandeis University in
	Boston, Massachusetts, working with Nathan Kaplan, Wilson returned to
	Berkeley for the remainder of his career and built a molecular
	evolution laboratory. Wilson was assistant professor from 1964 to
	1968, associate professor from 1968 to 1972 and full professor at
	Berkeley from 1972 until his death.
Wilson combined his background in biochemistry and zoology to
	study the evolution of different species. In the 1960s many claimed
	that African apes were humans’ closest living relatives. For more than a hundred years, scientists had debated the time of
	origin of a distinct hominid linage. The fossil record
	yielded estimates that a common ancestor of African apes and modern
	humans lived from four million to thirty million years ago. Rather
	than relying solely on fossils, Wilson studied the genetic
	relationships of currently living species.
In the 1960s and early 1970s, technologies to directly determine
	DNA sequences did not exist. Wilson instead used proteins to study the
	relatedness of humans and apes. He separated and purified proteins
	from one species and injected them into another unrelated species to
	induce the production of proteins known as antibodies, which react
	with the foreign proteins and create an immune response. The
	antibodies resulting from this experiment are specific to the
	proteins used to generate them and, when compared to other
	antibodies, can be used determine the relatedness of proteins from
	different species. Wilson used electrophoresis, a technique that
	sends a constant electric current through a mixture of proteins
	suspended in a gel, to compare the size and acidy, or surface
	charge, of proteins from humans and apes different species. He
	assumed that the more alike protein molecules are from different
	species, the more recently they shared a common ancestor.
In the mid 1960s, Wilson and his doctoral student Vincent
	Sarich used antibodies to study the differences between blood
	proteins in African apes and modern humans. In 1967, Sarich and
	Wilson published "Immunological Time Scale for Hominid Evolution,"
	in which they proposed the hypothesis of a molecular clock to
	calculate the time of species divergence. Sarich and Wilson compared
	the blood protein albumin from humans and chimpanzees, presupposing
	that mutations accumulate within a species over time at a steady
	rate. They used the concept of a molecular clock to compare the
	differences between human and chimpanzee albumin, and calculated
	that humans and African apes shared a common ancestor as recently as
	five million years ago. Those results challenged the fossil-derived
	figure of fifteen to twenty-five million years ago.
In 1975, Wilson and his graduate student Mary-Claire King
	published "Evolution at Two Levels in Humans and Chimpanzees." They
	used four different techniques to compare forty-four structural
	genes from humans and chimpanzees and estimated that the proteins synthesized from those genes
	differed by only one percent. In the article, King and Wilson note
	that the one percent difference contrasts sharply with the huge
	morphological and behavioral differences between the species that
	evolved after the separation of human and chimpanzee lineages. King
	and Wilson hypothesized that mutations, gene rearrangements, and
	deletions probably occurred in regulatory genes that affected gene
	expression or altering the nucleotide sequence of gene promoters.
	They based that hypothesis on François Jacob’s and Jacques Monod’s
	1961 model for gene regulation, called the operon model. As
	techniques to directly compare DNA base pairs were not yet available, King and Wilson used protein amino acid sequences to
	compare human and chimpanzee genes. In 2005, after the Human Genome
	Project had described the entire human genome, researchers compared
	the human genome to the chimpanzee genome. They concluded that the
	one percent difference noted by King and Wilson represented only
	point mutations, which are mutations to single bases in DNA,
	that occurred after the evolutionary split between humans and
	chimpanzees.
In the 1980s, Wilson started to implement new techniques to
	isolate and purify DNA. By taking DNA from different animals,
	heating the DNA to separate the two strands, and hybridizing it with
	the other animals' heated DNA, Wilson could see how well DNA from
	one species bonded with the DNA from the other. The introduction of
	enzymes that cut DNA molecules at precise points, called DNA
	restriction enzymes, and the ability to map known restriction sites
	to a sequence of DNA, called DNA restriction maps, enabled
	researchers to compare the DNA nucleotide sequences at high
	resolution.	In Wilson’s laboratory, researchers refined techniques
	in which a small amount of DNA is replicated many times to make
	multiple copies of the original DNA sequence, called Polymerase
	Chain Reaction (PCR). Researchers used PCR to study DNA sequences in many species.
In the late 1980s, Rebecca L. Cann, Mark Stoneking, and Wilson
	used the technique of DNA restriction maps to analyze the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) from
	five different human geographic populations. MtDNA lies outside the
	nucleus in a cell's cytoplasm in the subcellular
	particles (organelles) called mitochondria, which produce energy for the cell. The small double
	stranded ring of mtDNA codes for thirty-seven genes, compared to
	approximately 30,000 genes coded in nuclear DNA (nDNA). MtDNA
	mutates at a higher rate than does nDNA. In the process of inheritance
	from parents to offspring, all of the mitochondria come from the egg
	cell (oocyte), unchanged from mother to offspring except for
	mutations. 
In 1987, Cann, Stoneking, and Wilson published the
	results of their study as "Mitochondrial DNA and Human Evolution." By combining mtDNA sequence data from different human geographic
	populations and applying the molecular clock hypothesis, Cann,
	Stoneking, and Wilson traced the modern human gene pool to Africa
	and a common female ancestor who lived approximately 200,000 years
	ago. Mass media called this ancestor Mitochondrial Eve or African
	Eve.
As technologies became available to directly study DNA sequences,
	Wilson’s laboratory adopted them. Over the years, Wilson applied new
	techniques such as DNA restriction enzymes, DNA hybridization, and a
	technique amplifying small samples of DNA using PCR. Moreover,
	Wilson’s laboratory was the first to use PCR to amplify fossil DNA
	from extinct species and human mummies. That technique enabled
	researchers to compare ancient DNA with DNA from species living
	today.
Wilson published greater than 300 papers and articles with
	students and faculty members. He mentored greater than 100
	undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and
	visiting professors from six continents. With his direction,
	thirty-four doctoral students, seventeen women and seventeen men,
	obtained their PhDs.
Wilson received many awards, including two Guggenheim Fellowships
	and the MacArthur Fellowship in 1986. Wilson was an elected a member
	of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and, on 20 March 1986,
	he became a fellow of the Royal Society of London. In 1991, Wilson
	received the 3M Life Sciences Award from the Federation of
	American Societies for Experimental Biology (FASEB).
Wilson died of leukemia on 2 July 1991 in Seattle, Washington. 
 Sources "Allan Wilson’s
		Scientific Legacy." Allan Wilson
		Center for Molecular Ecology and Evolution. March, 2011. 1–2.
		http://www.allanwilsoncentre.ac.nz/massey/fms/AWC/documents/schoolreference_Lowrez.pdf  (Accessed 9 September 2012).
Ames,
		Bruce N., Thomas H. Jukes, Vincent M. Sarich, and David B. Wake.
		 "Allan Charles   Wilson, Biochemistry; Molecular Biology:
		Berkeley" University of California: In Memoriam, (1991): 237–40.
		http://texts.cdlib.org/view?docId=hb4t1nb2bd&doc.view=frames&chunk.id=div00079&toc.depth=1&toc.id= (Accessed 23 April 2014).
Anderson, Stephan, Alan T. Bankier, Bart G. Barrell, Maarten H.
		L. de Bruijn, Alan R. Coulson, Jacques Drouin, Ian C. Eperon,
		Donald P. Nierlich, Bruce A. Roe, Fred Sanger, Peter H.
		Schreier, Andrew J. H. Smith, Rodger Staden and Ian G. Young.
		"Sequence and Organization of the Human Mitochondrial Genome."
		Nature 290 (1981): 457–65.
Cann, Rebecca L. "Obituary: Allan C.
		Wilson, 1936–1991," Human Biology 65:3 (1993): 343–58.
Cann,
		Rebecca L., Mark Stoneking, and Allan C. Wilson. "Mitochondrial
		DNA and Human Evolution." Nature 325 (1987): 31–6.
Jacob,
		François, and Jacques Monod. "Genetic Regulatory Mechanisms in
		the Synthesis of Proteins." Journal of Molecular Biology 3
		(1961): 318–56.
Jukes, Thomas, and Emile Zuckerkandl.
		"Remembering Allan Wilson." Journal of Molecular Evolution 33
		(1991): ii.
King, Mary-Claire. "Allan C. Wilson (1934–91): In
		Memoriam." American Journal of Human Genetics 50 (1992): 234–5.
King, Mary-Claire, and Allan C. Wilson. "Evolution at Two Levels
		in Human and Chimpanzees." Science 188 (1975): 107–16.
Morange,
		Michel. "The Genetic Distance Between Humans and Chimpanzees:
		What did Mary-Claire King and Allan Wilson Really Say in 1975?"
		Journal of Biosciences 36 (2011): 23–6.
Raff, Rudolf A. 
		"Evo-devo: The Evolution of a New Discipline." Nature Reviews
		Genetics 1 (2000): 74–9.
Sarich, Vincent M., and Allan C.
		Wilson. "Immunological Time Scale for Hominid Evolution."
		Science 158 (1967): 1200–3.
Wilson, Allan C. "The Molecular
		Basis of Evolution." Scientific American 253 (1985): 164–73.
		 

How to cite
Haskett, Dorothy, "Allan Charles Wilson (1934-1991)". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-07-24). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8069.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Thursday, July 24, 2014 - 23:20
 Topic
Subject
DNA Restriction Enzymes; Wilson, Allan, 1934-1991; Human evolution; Evolution; Chimpanzees; Mitochondria; Molecular clock of evolution; Sarich, Vincent; Electrophoresis; Molecular genetics; Genes; King, Mary-Claire, 1946-; Polymerase chain reaction; University of California, Berkeley; People