By Yawen Zou
Published: 2014-07-20
Keywords: pangenesis, gemmule, The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication
 Charles Darwin's Theory of PangenesisIn 1868 in England, Charles Darwin proposed his
	pangenesis theory to describe the units of inheritance between
	parents and offspring and the processes by which those units control
	development in offspring. Darwin coined the concept of gemmules, which he said referred to hypothesized
	minute particles of inheritance thrown off by all cells of the body.
	The theory suggested that an organism's environment could modify the gemmules in any parts of the body, and that
	these modified gemmules would congregate in the reproductive organs
	of parents to be passed on to their offspring. Darwin's theory of pangenesis
	 gradually lost popularity in the 1890s when biologists increasingly 
	abandoned the theory of inheritance of acquired characteristics
	(IAC), on which the pangenesis theory partially relied. Around the turn of the
	twentieth century, biologists replaced the theory of pangenesis with
	germ plasm theory and then with chromosomal theories of inheritance, and they
	replaced the concept of gemmules with that of genes.  
Pangenesis theory
	originated from the claim that characteristics acquired during an
	organism's life were heritable. A theory of inheritance of acquired
	characteristics (IAC) had persistent for almost two thousand years,
	since Greek antiquity. For example, Hippocrates, who lived during the
	fifth to fourth centuries BCE in Hellas, which later became Greece, used this theory to explain why
	some people had longer than normal heads. Hippocrates said that some parents by custom bandaged their children in such a way that the
	children developed long heads as they grew. He said that nature would reinforce this
	custom after many generations, so that even if parents stopped using
	bandages, the heads of their offspring would be still grow long. Many
	scientists and philosophers in the eighteenth and nineteenth century
	favored some form of IAC theory, including Jean-Baptiste Lamarck in Paris,
	France, Charles Lyell in London, England, and, to some extent, Charles Darwin.
	Lamarck's contribution to the theory of IAC garnered for it the
	label Larmarckian. Lamarck stated that all the characters acquired
	during an individual's life transmitted to their offspring.
	Darwin at times adopted forms of an IAC theory, and he attempted to further describe the unit
	of inheritance that passed between parents and offspring.
During the nineteenth century, many scientists sought to explain
	how traits passed from one generation to another, although most
	hypotheses lacked experimental support. For example, Herbert Spencer
	in London, England, propounded the theory of physiological units in his
	1864 book Principles of Biology. Spencer postulated that
	cells contained physiological units, an intermediate structure
	between what he called chemical units, such as proteins, and
	morphological units, such as cells. Spencer implied that those
	physiological units in parents transmitted to their offspring, so that parents and
	offspring looked similar to each other. Spencer continued to explain that use or
	disuse of structures could alter physiological units. Darwin had
	noted the concept, and later admitted that Spencer's theory
	coincided with his own.
In 1868, Darwin  proposed the
	pangenesis theory in the concluding chapter of his book The
	Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication. In Darwin's
	account, the theory of pangenesis complemented his theory of natural
	selection, described in his 1859 On the Origin of Species by
	Means of Natural Selection. The theory of natural selection said that
	species adapted to their environments through selection on those
	organisms to fit in those environments. Critics highlighted the
	theory's lack of mechanisms for inheritance and development. In his
	1859 book, Darwin had not explained how environments caused
	different organisms in the same population to vary in their traits, or how offspring inherited those variations from their
	parents. 
Darwin proposed pangenesis theory to complement his 1859 theory of evolution via
	natural selection. Darwin coined the term
	pangenesis, with "pan-" meaning whole, and "genesis" indicating
	origin. With the term pangenesis, Darwin suggested that all parts of the
	parents could contribute to the evolution and development of the
	offspring.
Darwin postulated the existence of a hereditary
	material inside cells. Nonetheless, Darwin had not experimented on
	cells to demonstrate his theory, so he called it a provisional
	hypothesis. Darwin argued that, in what he called higher animals or plants, every
	cell in their bodies emitted small particles, which were units of
	heredity, that he called gemmules. The gemmules could either
	circulate and disperse in the body system, or they could aggregate
	in the sexual cells located in reproductive organs. As hereditary
	units, the gemmules transmitted from parents to offspring, where
	they developed into cells that resembled the parents' cells.  It
	was not sexual cells alone that generated a new organism, but rather
	all cells in the body as a whole. Darwin argued that
	environments could cause variations to gemmules of body
	cells or to those in sexual cells, so a collection of gemmules could reflect changes
	that had occurred to all parts of an organism's body.
Darwin used the
	concept of gemmules to explain some phenomena regarding
	heredity, variation, and development. These phenomena included
	regeneration of body parts, reversion, and sexual and asexual
	reproduction. For example, Darwin offered an explanation for
	reversion, the phenomenon that a trait of remote ancestors would
	reappear in organisms whose more immediate ancestors lacked the trait. He claimed that gemmules could either go into
	the state of dormancy or be active. Darwin said that, in the
	phenomenon of reversion, a gemmule transmitted from the remote
	ancestors to immediate parents and then to the offspring, but the
	gemmule was dormant in direct parents, and it was only active in remote
	ancestors and in the offspring.
Darwin also used gemmules to explain
	sexual reproduction and asexual reproduction. Sexual reproduction
	involves two parents of different sexes, while asexual reproduction
	concerns reproduction from only one parent, often involving budding.
	Darwin claimed that, in asexual reproduction, gemmules from every
	cell type in a parent aggregated in a bud, which would develop into
	a new individual. In sexual reproduction, gemmules from both parents
	blended in the sexual organs to be passed to the offspring.
Darwin never had any experimental results to support the
	existence of gemmules. Darwin based his pangenesis theory, as well
	as the theory of natural selection, on his observation of turtles,
	finches, and other species in different environments, and on fossils
	he had gathered from his voyage on the Beagle, a ship of the British Navy, in the 1830s. Darwin's
	pangenesis theory lacked details at cell and molecular
	levels.
Many criticized Darwin's theory of pangenesis. To test the theory, Darwin's
	cousin Francis Galton in London, England, conducted a series of
	blood transfusion experiments. Galton transfused blood
	between different colored rabbits. Galton hypothesized that the blood
	contained gemmules that would shape the color of the offspring. By
	transfusing the blood from a white rabbit to a black rabbit, the
	black rabbit would have different colored descendents than normal
	black rabbits, which did not get transfused blood. But the result of the
	experiment contrasted Darwin's prediction, black rabbits with the blood from white rabbits produced offspring that were black, and Galton claimed that
	gemmules did not exist.  Darwin responded by implying that
	gemmules might exist in other bodily fluid, and he did not
	explicitly say they were in blood.
Scientists such as Hugo de Vries in the
	Netherlands and August Weismann in Germany
	formulated theories of heredity shortly after Darwin. De Vries
	propounded the intracellular pangenesis theory in 1889, a modified
	theory of pangenesis. According to De Vries, gemmules cannot
	transfer from body cells to sexual cells. De Vries argued that
	gemmules could only move between the nucleus and the cytoplasm
	inside a single cell, so his theory was called intracellular
	pangenesis theory. To distinguish between his theory and Darwin's, De Vries used the term pangene to replace the term gemmules for
	the unit of hereditary materials. By 1909, Wilhelm Johannsen in Denmark shortened the term pangene to the term gene. 
In a passage of his 1893 book
	The Germ Plasm: a theory of heredity, Weismann stated that
	small units of materials in the cells of organisms pass from parents to their
	offspring. Nonetheless, Weismann argued that only the hereditary
	material in the sexual cells, or germ cells, could transmit to
	offspring. Weismann called his theory germ-plasm theory. Principles of the
	germ-plasm theory gradually replaced Darwin's pangenesis theory, but biologists adopted little of Weismann's terminology.
Darwin's theory of pangenesis proved obsolete after the rediscovery of
	Gregor Mendel's laws of heredity in 1900. In the 1860s in Brno, Austrian
	Empire, which later became the Czech Republic, Mendel had studied how
	heritable factors in sexually reproducing plants behaved across generations, and he had inferred laws to describe those behaviors. Mendel did not study the actual units of
	inheritance, but only the phenotypes or traits hypothesized to develop in organisms that had those factors. With his laws, Mendel could predict
	phenotypes among the offspring from data about the phenotypes of
	parents. Mendel's laws, unstudied for decades, were rediscovered in 1900, and Walter Sutton in the US and Theodor Boveri in Europe soon paired those laws to the mechanistic descriptions of how chromosomes behaved in replicating cells, creating a chromosomal theory of inheritance.
Following William Bateson
	in  England and Wilhelm Johannsen in Denmark, most biologists eventually 
	rejected theories of the inheritance of acquired characteristics and Darwin's pangenesis theory, and they used the term gene to refer to those things that Mendel had called factors. Furthermore, they followed Weismann and held that only genes from sex cells, and not genes from body cells, transmitted from parents to offspring.  
	Additionally, many adopted the chromosomal theory of inheritance, which held that the mechanisms of replicating cells and chromosomes physically explained the behaviors, postulated by Mendel, of genes, which biologists postulated to be in the chromosomes of cells. Scientists in the early and middle decades of the twentieth century worked to fit the chromosomal and genetic theories of inheritance with Darwin's theory of the evolution of species by natural selection. 
 Sources Bateson,
		William. Problems of Genetics. London: Oxford University
		Press, 1913. http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/bibliography/1517#/
		summary (Accessed November 24, 2013).
Boveri, Theodor. Ergebnisse über die Konstitution der Chromatischen Substanz des Zellkerns. [Results of the Constitution of the Chromatic Substance of the Nucleus]. Gustav Fischer, 1904. http://dx.doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.9070 (Accessed April 17, 2014).
Darwin,
		Charles. On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural
		Selection. London: John Murray, 1859. http://darwin-online.org.uk/content/
		frameset?pageseq=1& itemID= F373&viewtype=text
		(Accessed March 4, 2014).
Darwin, Charles. The
		Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication. London:
		John Murray, 1868. http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/bibliography/61215#/
		summary (Accessed November 24, 2013).
Deichmann,
		Ute. "Gemmules and Elements: On Darwin's and Mendel's Concepts
		and Methods in Heredity." The Journal for General Philosophy
		of Science 41 (2010): 85–112.
de Vries, Hugo. Intracellular Pangenesis: including a paper on
fertilization and hybridization. Ed. Gager, Stuart C. Chicago: Open
Court, 1910. 
http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/bibliography/3778#/summary
(Accessed November 24, 2013).
Galton, Francis. "Experiments in
pangenesis, by breeding from rabbits of a pure variety, into whose
circulation blood taken from other varieties had previously been largely
transfused." Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 19
(1870): 393–410 http://rspl.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/19/123-129/393.full.pdf  (Accessed March 4
2014).
Geison, Gerald. "Darwin and Heredity: The Evolution of His
Hypothesis of Pangenesis." Journal of the History of Medicine and
Allied Sciences 24 (1969): 388–91.
Hippocrates. The
Genuine Works of Hippocrates. Trans. Francis Adams. New
York: W. Wood and Company, 1886. http://books.google
.com/books?id=HYIIAAAAIAAJ  (Accessed November 24, 2013).
Hodge, Jonathan. "The Darwin of Pangenesis." Comptes Rendus
Biologies 333 (2010): 129–33.
Johannsen, Wilhelm Ludvig.
Über Erblichkeit in Populationen und reinen Linien. Eine Beitrag
zur Beleuchtung schwebender Selektionsfragen. [On Heredity in Pure
Lines and Populations. A Contribution to Pending Questions of
Selection]. Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1903. https://archive.org/stream/uebererblichkei00johagoog#page/n3/mode/2up (Accessed
://March
4, 2014).
Johannsen, Wilhelm Ludvig. Elemente der Exakten Erblichkeitslehre. [The Elements of an Exact Theory of Heredity]. Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1909. http://dx.doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.1060 (Accessed November 16, 2012).
Johannsen, Wilhelm Ludvig. “The Genotype Conception of Heredity.” The American Naturalist 45 (1911): 129–59.
Lamarck, Jean-Baptiste. Philosophie zoologique:
ou, Exposition des considérations relatives à l'histoire
naturelle des animaux. [Zoological Philosophy: Exposition with Regard
to the Natural History of Animals]. Vol. 1. Paris: F. Savy, 1873. 
http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/bibliography/26297#/summary
(Accessed November 24, 2013).
Liu, Yongsheng. "Reversion: Going
Back to Darwin's Works." Trends in Plant Science 10 (2005):
471–72.
Liu, Yongsheng. "A New Perspective on Darwin's
Pangenesis." Biology Review 83 (2008): 141–49. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1469-185X.2008.00036.x/full (Accessed July 16, 2014)
Lyell,
Charles. Principles of Geology: or the Modern Changes of the Earth
and Its Inhabitants Considered as Illustrative of Geology. London:
John Murray, 1867–1868. 
http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/bibliography/50587#/summary
(Accessed November 24, 2013).
Mendel, Gregor Johann. "Versuche
über Pflanzen-Hybriden" [Experiments Concerning Plant Hybrids].
Verhandlungen des naturforschenden Vereines in Brünn
[Proceedings of the Natural History Society of Brünn] IV (1865): 3–47.
Reprinted in Fundamenta Genetica, ed. Jaroslav Kříženecký, 15–56.
Prague: Czech Academy of Sciences, 1966. http://www.mendelweb.org/
Mendel.html (Accessed January 30, 2014).
McComas, William
F. "Darwin's Invention: Inheritance and the 'Mad Dream' of Pangenesis."
The American Biology Teacher 74 (2012): 86–91.
McComas,
William F. "Darwin's Error: Using the Story of Pangenesis to Illustrate
Aspects of Nature of Science in the Classroom." The American Biology
Teacher 74 (2012): 151–56.
Stanford, Kyle P. "Darwin's
Pangenesis and the Problem of Unconceived Alternatives." British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science 57 (2006): 121–44. 
Spencer, Herbert. The Principles of Biology. New York: D.
Appleton and Company, 1881. 
http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/bibliography/60804#/summary
(Accessed November 24, 2013).
Sutton, Walter. "The Chromosomes in Heredity." Biological Bulletin 4 (1903): 231–50. https://archive.org/stream/biologicalbullet04mari#page/230/mode/2up (Accessed April, 17, 2014).
Veuille, Michel. "A Non-Darwinian
Darwin: An Introduction." Comptes Rendus Biologies 333 (2010):
83–86.
Weismann, August. The Germ-Plasm: A Theory of
Heredity. New York: C. Scribner's sons, 1893. 
http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/bibliography/25196#/summary
(Accessed November 24, 2013).
Winther, Rasmus G. "Darwin on
Variation and Heredity." Journal of the History of Biology 33
(2000): 425–55.
Zirkle, Conway. "The Inheritance of Acquired
Characters and the Provisional Hypothesis of Reviewed Pangenesis."
The American Naturalist 69 (1935): 417–45.
Zirkle,
Conway.  "Further Notes on Pangenesis and the Inheritance of Acquired
Characters." The American Naturalist 70 (1936): 529–46.
Zirkle, Conway. "The Early History of the Idea of the Inheritance of
Acquired Characters and of Pangenesis." Transactions of the American
Philosophical Society 35 (1946): 91–151.


How to cite
Zou, Yawen, "Charles Darwin's Theory of Pangenesis". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-07-20). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8041.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Monday, July 21, 2014 - 17:02
 Topic
Subject
 Heredity; Darwin, Charles, 1809-1882; Reproduction; Evolution; Natural selection; Inheritance of acquired characters; Variation (Biology); Johannsen, W. (Wilhelm), 1857-1927; Weismann, August, 1834-1914; Bateson, William, 1861-1926; Sutton, Walter Stanborough, 1877-1916; Boveri, Theodor, 1862-1915; Vries, Hugo de, 1848-1935; Concept