By M. Elizabeth Barnes
Published: 2014-11-14
Keywords: developmental constraints, von Baer's Laws, adaptationism
 "The Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian Paradigm: A Critique of the Adaptationist Programme" (1979), by Stephen J. Gould and Richard C. Lewontin"The Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian Paradigm:
	A Critique of the Adaptationist Programme," hereafter called
	"The Spandrels," is an article written by Stephen J. Gould and
	Richard C. Lewontin published in the Proceedings of the Royal
	Society of London in 1979. The paper emphasizes issues with
	what the two authors call adaptationism or the adaptationist
	programme as a framework to explain how species and traits evolved. The paper
	is one in a series of works in which Gould emphasized the
	role of development in evolutionary theories. The article suggests
	that constraints on how organisms can develop and constraints on how species can evolve from others play a
	central role in explaining how species and traits evolve. The
	authors note that organisms from different species develop as
	embryos through stages similar across species, genera, and higher
	classes. Gould and Lewontin hypothesize that those stages
	constrained the possible pathways of evolution and has therefore
	guided the history of life. Throughout the paper, the authors rely on analogy of some parts of organisms to architectural structures called spandrels, marked in this image as 'a'.
Gould and Lewontin both worked at Harvard
	University in Cambridge, Massachusetts, from 1967 until 2002 when
	Gould died of lung cancer. When "The Spandrels" was published in
	1979, Gould had already published Ontogeny and Phylogeny,
	which explores the relationship between how organisms develop and
	how species evolved from other species.
During this time, Lewontin studied how constraints on how organisms can develop (developmental constraints) related to the
	diversification of species from one another. Gould and Lewontin challenged the use of
	adaptation stories to explain how all of organisms' traits evolved,
	and they  warned the scientific community against a theory of
	biological determinism. Proponents of biological determinism, which
	is the claim that many organisms' traits are determined primarily by
	their genetic makeup, argued that evolution could explain social
	behaviors such as altruism and aggression. Theories of biological
	determinism worried Gould and Lewontin because, in the past,
	individuals with similar theories had used them to justify
	violations of civil rights, based on claims that some people in some populations had innate criminality or poor
	intellect, whereas people in other populations did not. An example was the eugenic movement at the beginning of
	the twentieth century, when many people were sterilized against
	their will to prevent those who were seen as weak or feeble minded
	from reproducing. But in addition to their concerns about biological
	determinism, Gould and Lewontin noted that biologists
	continually disregarded non-selective forces like phyletic and
	developmental constraints when they described the history of life on
	earth. Gould and Lewontin argued that these forces shaped the diversity of life.
Gould and Lewontin described
	the adaptationist program as a framework with which researchers described the causes
	of particular forms and functions in animals, which those researchers conceived as
	collections of separate parts. According to Gould and Lewontin, the adaptationist
	program, each part of an organism had a particular shape due to the
	action of natural selection. Adaptationists created  evolutionary stories
	without collecting any evidence about how traits actually evolved,
	and Gould and Lewontin described this procedure as making up just-so
	stories. The authors argued that this explanatory method 
	falters often because it ignores constraints, which limit the number of
	possible forms into which organisms can develop. Furthermore, the authors
	claimed that constraint theories often provide better explanations of
	structure and function than adaptationist theories do. 
"The Spandrels" has six sections. The
	first three sections describe Gould and Lewontin's interpretation of
	the adaptationist program. The last three sections offer
	an alternative interpretation of evolutionary processes by pointing
	to phyletic and developmental constraints as main causes of the
	evolution of traits.
In the introduction, Gould and Lewontin
	describe what they call the shortcomings of the adaptationist
	program using an analogy. The authors describe the spandrels in the
	church of St. Mark's Cathedral in Venice, Italy. After the cathedral was built, artists painted images in the spandrels. 
	If we investigated the spandrels without that information, we might conclude that the architects designed the cathedral to have spandrels to bear images. Spandrels, then, provide an example of
	how something that looks intricately designed may lead us to
	believe that architects purposefully created the spandrels for the
	decorations themselves. However, Gould and Lewontin note that the
	spandrels result when builders place a domed ceiling upon a square room
	that has arched doorways, and although spandrels only exist for structural
	purposes, they also host artistic decorations. Anytime a building
	has domed ceiling on a square room with arched doorways, the
	structure will have spandrels.
	Lewontin and Gould argue that if we understand the origin of the spandrels, then we can analogously understand the origin of some biological structures.
	Maybe, Gould and Lewontin hypothesize, developmental constraints are
	the cause of many traits, as they explain the origin of particular
	traits better than does adaptation, just as architectural
	constraints explain the origin of spandrels better than does the
	intricate artwork inside them.
In sections two and three,
	Gould and Lewontin claim that adaptationists see natural selection
	as the only and all-powerful force that can overcome any constraint
	to species' traits. The authors compare the
	adaptationists view to the character of Dr. Pangloss, a parody of
	Gottfried W. von Leibniz in one of Voltaire's 1759 pamphlets. In the
	story, Dr. Pangloss, a naive optimistic philosopher, claims that our
	world is the best of all possible worlds. Like Dr. Pangloss,
	adaptationists are naive according to Gould and Lewontin. They
	say that adaptationists naively atomize organisms into particular
	traits and then provide optimality stories about how those parts evolved. If an optimality story
	proves false, the adaptationists then set another optimality
	story instead of exploring the different possibilities that do not
	involve adaptation.
In the fourth section of the article,
	Gould and Lewontin describe how Charles Darwin's 1859 theory of
	evolution is similar to their view and not to adaptationists'
	approaches. The authors note that Darwin consistently showed a
	pluralistic approach to the causes of evolution, considering several alternatives to natural selection. Gould and
	Lewontin argue that Darwin did not claim that natural selection was
	the only important cause of evolution.
In the fifth
	section of the article, Gould and Lewontin highlight several
	instances in which adaptation is not the primary cause of the form and
	function of particular traits.  According to the authors,
	selection does not necessarily result in a trait being adapted to the environment, whereas
	adaptation cannot occur without selection. The authors point to
	genetic drift, an evolutionary process due to random mating in finite populations, as
	a process that requires neither selection nor adaptation. Furthermore,
	the authors show that selection without adaptation can occur in the
	hypothetical scenario where a mutation doubles the amount of
	offspring an organism can birth at once. The mutation would spread
	throughout the population, but if environmental resources didn't
	also double, then parents in the evolved population would have no
	more offspring than parents in the ancestral population, and thus
	would be no better adapted to their environment. Also, adaptation
	without selection occurs when the environment itself physically
	causes adaptive traits. For example, the currents in the ocean
	physically change sponges and corals. These changes, although not
	selected, increase the chances of survival of the organisms. Gould
	and Lewontin highlight the difficulties in distinguishing the origin
	of a part adapted to its environment, because that part might have been
	originally adapted for a different function than it later serves,
	and it might have undergone multiple adaptations for different
	functions throughout the evolutionary history of the species.
The final section of the article proposes a theory of how species
	evolve with developmental constraints. The authors stress the
	importance of integrating developmental constraints with adaptive
	explanations into evolutionary biology. Additionally, they discuss
	the concept of body plan or Bauplan, which is analogous to a
	blue print by which an organism develops. For instance, humans are poorly
	adapted to walking on two legs, because
	the majority of the human Bauplan has evolved for walking on arms and legs, as apes do. Proponents of the Bauplan consider organisms as
	integrative wholes, not as mere collections of parts.
To support
	their claim that developmental constraints operate in
	evolutionary processes, Gould and Lewontin describe Karl Ernst von
	Baer's 1828 embryological laws. Von Baer's laws state that early
	developmental stages are highly conserved throughout species,
	meaning that there are not many changes made early on in the
	development of organism from across many animal species.  Changes
	made early in development will accumulate and affect all systems in
	later stages of development so that, if a change occurs at early
	stages, it can disrupt the further development of the organism. The
	authors state that this conservation leads to developmental
	constraints, and they claim that there are a limited number of
	developmental pathways an organism can follow without dying. Therefore, organisms are constrained to a particular
	evolutionary pathway.
Gould and Lewontin conclude their
	article by emphasizing that the adaptationists' theory is not
	compatible with the theory of organisms as integrative wholes. In
	early developmental stages, an organism cannot be pulled apart piece
	by piece into different traits that can then each be described for a
	specific function. All parts of a system depend upon one
	another. Small changes to the Bauplan can be explained by
	adaptation, but adaptation cannot explain the origin of variation between individuals within the same species.
"The Spandrels"
	prompted Gould and Elisabeth Vrba to publish a further article in
	1982, suggesting the term exaptation to describe a trait once
	adapted for a function but that natural selection has remodeled for
	a different use.
 Sources Amundson, Ron.
		"Two Concepts of Constraint: Adaptationism and the Challenge
		from Developmental Biology." Philosophy of Science 61
		(1994): 556–578.
Bendall, Derek S., and Patrick Forber.
		"Spandrels and a pervasive problem of evidence." Biology and
		Philosophy 24 (2009): 247–66.
Darwin, Charles.
		On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection.
		London: John Murray, 1859. http://dx.doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.68064 (Accessed October 9, 2014).
Davidson, Thomas. Chambers's Twentieth Century Dictionary
		of the English Language. London: W. & R. Chambers, 1903.
		
		https://archive.org/details/chambersstwentie00daviiala
		(Accessed April 3, 2014).
Dawkins, Richard. "Universal
		Darwinism." Evolution from Molecules to Man. Ed. Derek
		S. Bendall. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
		1983: 403–25.
Gould, Stephen J., and Richard C. Lewontin. "The
		Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian Paradigm: A Critique
		of the Adaptationist Programme." Proceedings of the Royal
		Society of London 205 (1979): 581–98. http://rspb.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/205/1161/581.abstract (Accessed November 11, 2014).
Gould,
		Stephen J. "The evolutionary biology of constraint."
		Daedalus 109 (1980): 39–52. http://www.jstor.org/stable/20024665 (Accessed November 12, 2014).
Mayr, Ernst. "How
		to Carry Out the Adaptationist Program?" The American
		Naturalist 121 (1983): 324–34.  http://www.jstor.org/stable/2461153 (Accessed November 12, 2014).
McKitrick, Mary.
		"Phylogenetic Constraint in Evolutionary Theory: Has It Any
		Explanatory Power?" Annual Review of Ecological Systems
		24 (1993): 307–30. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2097181 (Accessed November 12, 2014).
Orzack, Steven H., and Patrick
		Forber, "Adaptationism." The Stanford Encyclopedia of
		Philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2012/
		entries/adaptationism/ (Accessed January 15, 2013).
Pigliucci, Massimo and Jonathan Kaplan. "The fall and rise
		of Dr. Pangloss: adaptationism and the Spandrels paper 20 years
		later." Trends In Ecology and Evolution 15 (2000):
		66–70.
Smith, J. Maynard, Richard Burian, Stuart
		Kauffman, Pere Alberch, John Campbell, Brian Goodwin, Russell
		Lande, David Raup, and Lewis Wolpert. "Developmental constraints
		and evolution: a perspective from the Mountain Lake conference
		on development and evolution." Quarterly Review of
		Biology (1985): 265–87. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2828504 (Accessed November 12, 2014).
Sober, Elliot. "Evolution
		and optimality: feathers, bowling balls, and the thesis of
		adaptationism." Philosophic Exchange 26 (1996):
		41–55.
Sober, Elliot. Philosophy of Biology, 2nd
		ed. Boulder: Westview, 2000. 121–47.
Voltaire.
		Candide ou l'Optimisme. Paris: Cramer, 1759. 
		https://archive.org/details/candideouloptim02voltgoog
		(Accessed April 17, 2014).
von Baer, Karl Ernst. Über
		Entwickelungsgeschichte der Thiere. Beobachtung und
		Reflexion [On the Developmental History of Animals.
		Observation and Reflection]. Königsberg: Bornträger, 1828. http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/28306#page/7/mode/1up (Accessed November 12, 2014).


How to cite
Barnes, M. Elizabeth, ""The Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian Paradigm: A Critique of the Adaptationist Programme" (1979), by Stephen J. Gould and Richard C. Lewontin". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-11-14). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8239.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Thursday, November 20, 2014 - 22:36
 Topic
Subject
 Gould, Stephen Jay. Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian Paradigm; Gould, Stephen Jay; Lewontin, Richard C., 1929-; Evolution; adaptation; Spandrels; Harvard University; Baer, Karl Ernst von, 1792-1876; Literature