By Divyash Chhetri
Published: 2014-06-29
Keywords: Drosophila, Genetics
 Beadle and Ephrussi's Transplantation Technique for DrosophilaBoris Ephrussi and George Wells Beadle developed a transplantation
technique on flies,Drosophila melanogaster, which they described in
their 1936 article "A Technique of Transplantation for Drosophila." The
technique of injecting a tissue from one fly larva into another fly larva, using a
micropipette, to grow that tissue in the second larvae, was a
means for investigating development of Drosophila. Through this
technique, Beadle and Ephrussi studied the role of genes in
embryological processes. Beadle and Ephrussi were the first to apply the
transplantation method, which had previously been used in the study of
larger insects, to the smaller sized Drosophila. Beadle and Ephrussi
used this method of transplantation to determine if parts of the optic
disc, the section of a larvae that later become the eye buds in the
adult, could be extracted from one larva and transplanted into another.
They later built upon this research to relate the production of molecules in cells
to gene function.
 Beadle and Ephrussi developed their technique of
transplantation in Drosophila at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech)
in Pasadena, California, where Beadle had arrived in 1931 after being
awarded a US National Research Council Fellowship upon the completion of
his PhD from Cornell University in Ithica, New York. Ephrussi, who
previously worked at the Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique in Paris,
France, joined Beadle at Caltech after receiving a Rockefeller
Fellowship in 1934. Using Beadle's background in genetics as well as
Ephrussi's experimental embryology background, the researchers analyzed
genes that they hypothesized were relevant to the development of the
eyes in Drosophila. 
Beadle and Ephrussi studied gene expression, asking when,
where, and through what mechanisms were genes active in the process of
development in organisms. Prior to this experiment, researchers could
little explain or describe the development of organisms in
Drosophila, which had mostly been studied from a genetic viewpoint. They
conducted their experiments and developed their transplantation
technique at the Caltech in 1935. 
Ephrussi
and Beadle followed a protocol for transplantation. First, they
designed an apparatus that had two binocular microscopes sitting on
opposite sides of a narrow table. One microscope, microscope A, used by
one person, had a stand and a mechanism for the change of objects.
The other microscope, microscope B, which a different person used,
examined a test tube mounted on an adjustable stand. Microscope B faced
the first microscope, placed at an angle of forty-five degrees relative
to the table. A hypodermic syringe attached to a pipette holder was
tightened to the left of microscope A.
 With the apparatus in hand,
Beadle and Ephrussi constructed a micropipette. The micropipette enabled
them to remove the tissue that accounted for the characteristic of the
eye from the host larva, so they could then inject that tissue into
another larva, so that the larva into which the eggs were injected could
develop into a fly with a certain eye color. Beadle and Ephrussi created
a glass capillary with an external diameter of about 0.7 millimeter (mm) and a
thickness of 0.1 mm with a micro-burner. A capillary shaft ranging from
a diameter of 0.1 to 0.16 mm was attached to the capillary. The bore of
the shaft ranged from 0.06 to 0.12 mm in diameter, and the shaft was
broken so that its length was between 2 and 3 mm. The researchers heated
the bore to constrict it, and it at the base of the shaft. The diameter
of the constricted portion of the shaft ranged from 0.01 to 0.03 mm. The
final step in the process of making a suitable pipette required  the
shaft to be broken at such an angle that the tip was extremely sharp.

Beadle and Ephrussi washed the larvae for fifteen seconds in a solution
consisting of ninety-five percent alcohol, and then they rinsed the larvae in
a Ringer's solution, a mixture of salt and water used to extend the
lifespan of excised tissue. They dissected the host larvae using sharp
needles in a drop of the Ringer's solution. Beadle and Ephrussi varied
the exact procedure depending on the stage of development of a larva,
as well as the target tissue or organ. After preparation, which involved
the act of etherizing the host larvae in alcohol, they extracted the
tissue from the host under low magnification. The person doing the work
held the pipette in his right hand, while using his left hand to
manipulate the syringe to extract and inject materials. Beadle and
Ephrussi then placed the donor larva on the stage and held it in
position while they inserted the pipette on the ventral surface of the
larva, close to the posterior end. Finally, they transplanted the tissue
from one larva to another.
 In their article detailing the technique,
Beadle and Ephrussi noted that there was no best way of carrying out
the procedure correctly. They suggested that the method yielded the best
results after much practice, and that the techniques could be learned
only through experience.  In their artciles, Beadle and Ephrussi note
that this technique can be done with a number of tissues or organs, not
just optic discs. The application of this technique allowed Beadle and
Ephrussi to study the effects of genes in cell differentiation during
the 1930's. Beadle and Ephrussi used this technique to investigate how
genes affected embryonic development. They described the experimental
results of their research in a 1936 paper titled "The Differentiation of
Eye Pigments in Drosophila as Studied by Transplantation." From the
results, Ephrussi hypothesized that genes operated through the action of
hormones. 
Additionally, the transplantation technique and the subsequent
experimental results allowed the pair to establish the theory that genes
controlled the order of chemical reactions in the cell, which led to the
one gene-one enzyme hypothesis. The hypothesis, derived by the
collaboration of Beadle, Ephrussi, and Edward Tatum, a scientist at
Stanford University in Stanford, California, whom Beadle worked with
while researching Neurospora, sought to explain the relationship between
genotypes and phenotypes. 
Beadle and Ephrussi's transplantation techniques
yielded results that illuminated the mechanisms that affect the
phenotype, or physical characteristics, of organisms. Later, Beadle and
Ephrussi related the production of certain enzymes, as stated in their
one gene-one enzyme hypothesis, to the function of genes. The action of
genes provided the products that regulated enzymes in biochemical
reactions. Many later molecular biologists used the technique of transplantation as a genetic tool. 
 Sources Beadle, George
		W., and Edward L. Tatum. "Genetic Control of Biochemical
		Reactions in Neurospora." Proceedings of the National Academy of
		Sciences of the United States of America 27 (1941): 499–506. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1078370/ (Accessed June 27, 2014).
Ephrussi, Boris, and George Wells Beadle. "A Technique of
Transplantation for Drosophila." The American Naturalist 70 (1936):
218–25.
Ephrussi, Boris, and George Wells Beadle. "The Differentiation of Eye
Pigments in Drosophila as Studied by Transplantation." Genetics 21
(1936): 225–47. http://www.genetics.org/content/21/3/225.full.pdf
(Accessed April 22, 2014).
Morange, Michel. "Boris Ephrussi's Continuing Efforts to Create a
'Genetics of Differentiation.'" Journal of Biosciences 33 (2008): 21–5. http://www.ias.ac.in/jbiosci/mar2008/21.pdf (Accessed June 27, 2014).
Zallen, Doris T., and Richard M. Burian. "On the Beginnings of Somatic
Cell Hybridization: Boris Ephrussi and Chromosome Transplantation."
Genetics 132 (1992): 1–8. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1205109/ (Accessed June 27, 2014). 

How to cite
Chhetri, Divyash, "Beadle and Ephrussi's Transplantation Technique for Drosophila". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-06-29). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8015.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Sunday, June 29, 2014 - 14:58
 Topic
Subject
Tissue Transplantation; Tissue Extracts; Beadle, George Wells, 1903-1989; Ephrussi, Boris, 1901-1979; California Institute of Technology; Genes; Transplantation of organs, tissues, etc.; Technology