By Paige Madison
Published: 2015-01-22
Keywords: Dinosaur eggs, Fossils
 Roy Chapman Andrews
(1884–1960)Roy Chapman Andrews traveled the world studying fossils,
	from mammals to dinosaurs, during the first half of the twentieth
	century. Andrews worked and collected fossil specimens for the
	American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) in New York City, New
	York. Throughout his career, Andrews collected bones of many animal
	species, including a previously undiscovered species of a horned and
	herbivorous dinosaur, later named Proceratops andrewsi in his
	honor. Andrews published widely read narratives about his travels
	and field experiences, such as On the Trail of Ancient Man
	and Across Mongolian Plains. Andrews led expeditions for the
	Central Asiatic Expeditions in the Gobi Desert, which recovered many
	previously unknown fossil specimens. His Central Asiatic team
	discovered the first scientifically recognized dinosaur eggs, which
	provided scientists with information about the eggs that dinosaurs
	produced. Andrews was born to Cora May and Charles Ezra
	Andrews in Beloit, Wisconsin, on 26 January 1884. His father sold
	pharmaceutical drugs wholesale. Andrews later wrote in his
	autobiography that throughout his childhood he dreamt of becoming an
	explorer and naturalist. As a child he spent time in nature,
	hunting, studying wildlife, and camping. Andrews also taught himself
	taxidermy and earned money by preparing animals for display, often
	for local hunters. In addition to spending time in nature and
	working in taxidermy, he also read books on exploration and natural
	history. Andrews attended his hometown college, Beloit
	College in Beloit, Wisconsin, and he graduated with a Bachelor of
	Arts degree in English in 1906. Andrews then traveled to New York
	City to seek employment at the AMNH. He met with director Hermon
	Carey Bumpus, who said that there were no open positions suitable
	for Andrews´s talents in taxidermy. Andrews later stated that
	he wanted to work at the museum in any capacity, even if that meant
	scrubbing the floors. Bumpus hired Andrews as an assistant in the
	taxidermy department and instructed the head taxidermist to find
	Andrews work. During his employment at the AMNH, Andrews also
	furthered his education. In 1913, he received a Master´s of
	Science degree from Columbia University in New York, New York.
	Andrews´s thesis work reflected his research on whales with
	the AMNH. Andrews later received an honorary doctorate of science
	from Beloit College in 1928 for his expeditions, discoveries, and
	natural history travel narratives. Andrews began his
	scientific career at the AMNH by collecting animal specimens from
	various regions of the world.  The museums assigned him to measure
	and study different whale species, and to collect their skeletons
	for the museum. He conducted his whale studies in countries
	throughout the Pacific, including Korea, Japan, and Alaska.
	Publications such as Whale Hunting with Gun and Camera in
	1916 established Andrews as an expert about whales and elevated his
	position at the museum from taxidermy assistant to specimen
	collector.  Andrews´s travel stories and his personality,
	often described as charismatic, earned him a central place in New
	York society. His travels made headlines, and he attended many
	social events to garner funding for the museum. Andrews´s
	coworkers described his position as celebrated explorer.
Despite beginning with research on whales, Andrews stated in his
	1943 autobiography that his true dream of scientific exploration was
	on land searching for mammals, possibly even fossil evidence of
	ancient people. Andrews stated that he had wanted to travel to Asia
	to find evidence to support a hypothesis of Henry Fairfield Osborn,
	then AMNH´s president, on the origin of mammalian life.
	Osborn´s research compared the anatomy and locations of
	species and he argued that mammals, including humans, originated in
	central Asia. Andrews worked to provide the fossil evidence for that
	hypothesis. After he received his Master's of Science degree
	in 1914, Andrews married Yvette Borup. According to Andrews´
	biographer Charles Gallenkamp, his wife shared Andrews´s
	adventurous spirit. With the support of his wife, the newlywed
	Andrews proposed a series of expeditions to China and Mongolia in
	1915 to collect fossils for the museum. Andrews recruited the help
	of donors such as New York businessmen and financiers John Pierpont
	Morgan and John D. Rockefeller to raise money for the endeavors. The
	trips, later called the Central Asiatic Expeditions, occurred from
	1922 to 1930. During Andrews´s first Central Asiatic
	Expedition in 1922, his team recovered fragments of dinosaur
	eggshell in southern Mongolia at a location the explorers called the
	Flaming Cliffs.  Andrews and his team collected the eggshell along
	with many other mammal and dinosaur fossils, but the expedition
	departed the following morning, not exploring the site. The
	following year the team returned to the Flaming Cliffs to further
	excavate the sediments. That expedition yielded more eggshell
	fragments in addition to whole dinosaur eggs, including eggs that
	were part of nests called clutches. Andrews´s egg
	discoveries marked an early scientific study of dinosaur
	reproduction. The eggs were largely complete, in the shape of
	elongated ovals, with a rough bumpy texture to the eggshell.
	Although the eggs did not contain embryonic remains, scientists
	studied the microstructure of the fossilized eggshell to confirm
	that they were dinosaurian. The discovery that some dinosaurs laid
	eggs in clutches provided the first information about reproductive
	strategies of dinosaurs. Scientists noted that dinosaurs laid many
	eggs at one time to maximize reproductive success, much like their
	close relatives, crocodiles. Andrews and his team did not
	find any eggs containing fossilized embryos, so to identify the
	species that the eggs belonged to, they relied on the frequency of
	other fossil species recovered at the site. Andrews and his team
	said that the eggs likely belonged to a horn-faced and herbivorous
	dinosaur Proceratops andrewsi, later named after Andrews
	because he was the researcher who discovered the species. The team
	recovered many other P. andrewsi fossils from the sediments
	that contained the eggs, so the team concluded that the eggs were of
	the same species. Osborn published the taxonomic assignment in 1924.
	However, scientists later revised that taxonomic assignment when in
	the 1990s a team lead by Mark Norell from the AMNH recovered
	identically shaped eggs from the Djadochta Formation in the Gobi
	Desert containing embryonic remains. The embryonic remains more
	closely resembling a bird-like species of dinosaur named
	Oviraptor philoceratops. The dinosaur eggs that
	Andrews and his team brought back to the United States from Mongolia
	generated media attention across the country, in part due to the
	high profile fundraising Andrews had secured for the expedition. In
	the midst of the media attention, Andrews auctioned off an egg in
	New York City to raise money for future expeditions. The auction
	angered the Chinese government, which ruled Mongolia at the time,
	because Andrews had told them that while the fossils were
	scientifically valuable, the eggs possessed no monetary value.
	Although the auction was largely symbolic, with the winner donating
	the egg to a museum, there was a delay in the next expedition for
	more than a year while Andrews tried to reconcile with the Chinese
	government.  Despite the media attention, it took decades for
	the eggs to spark research about them. A few scientists described
	the microstructure of the eggshell. After 1993, when Norell and his
	team recovered more clutches of the same egg species, with one egg
	containing embryonic remains, scientists further examined the eggs
	recovered by Andrews.  Those scientists celebrated Andrews for
	bringing the first dinosaur eggs to public attention, and for
	initiating the study of dinosaur reproduction and early
	development. Andrews continued to head expeditions for the
	AMNH until 1934 when he became the AMNH's director, a position that
	occupied much of his time. Andrews´s first wife Yvette asked
	for a separation in 1927 and divorced him in 1931 on the grounds of
	desertion, as he spent most of his time in the field. Prior to their
	divorce, the couple had two sons, George Borup Andrews and Roy Kevin
	Andrews. Andrews later married Wilhelmina Christmas in 1935.
Andrews states in his autobiography that, as director of the
	AMNH, he struggled with the lack of physical exercise and excitement
	that the position entailed. He resigned in 1942 and became honorary
	director, which enabled him to spend time with his second wife at a
	farm in northwestern Connecticut. There, Andrews returned to the
	same activities he enjoyed as a child, such as hunting, fishing, and
	building trails.
Andrews published about his travels in more than twenty books.
	Those included travel narratives like On the Trail of Ancient
	Man and The New Conquest of Central Asia, and
	children´s texts such as All About Dinosaurs. In
	addition to his discoveries of dinosaur eggs and the
	Proceratops species that bears his name, Andrews discovered
	many other fossils and engaged in other research areas. That work
	included popular works on human origins, for example the text
	Meet Your Ancestors, a Biography of Primitive Man. Charles
	Gallenkamp´s 2001 biography, Dragon Hunter, emphasized
	Andrews´s charisma and passion for the field. Andrews was also
	immortalized in popular culture, some say that he partly inspired
	the Indiana Jones movies. Toward the end of his life, Andrews and
	his second wife moved to Tucson, Arizona, to avoid the cold
	Connecticut winters, where they remained until Andrews´s death
	in 1960.
 Sources "Roy
		Chapman Andrews." Encyclopedia of World Biography.
		2nd ed. Vol. 1. Detroit: Gale, 2004. 232–233. http://www.encyclopedia.com/topic/Roy_Chapman_Andrews.aspx
		(Accessed September 7, 2013). Andrews, Roy Chapman. 
		The California Gray Whale / Rhachianectes Glaucus Cope: Its
		History, Habits, External Anatomy, Osteology and
		Relationship. New York: Monographs of the Pacific Cetacea.
		New York: Memoirs of the AMNH, 1914. Andrews, Roy
		Chapman. Whale Hunting with Gun and Camera. New York: D.
		Appleton and Company, 1916. 
		https://archive.org/details/whalehuntingwith00andrrich
		(Accessed January 19, 2015). Andrews, Roy Chapman.
		Across Mongolian Plains. New York: D. Appleton and
		Company, 1921. 
		https://archive.org/details/acrossmongolian01andrgoog
		(Accessed January 19, 2015).  Andrews, Roy Chapman.
		On the Trail of Ancient Man. New York: G.P. Putnam's
		Sons, 1926. https:
		//archive.org/details/ontrailofancient00andr (Accessed
		January 19, 2015). Andrews, Roy Chapman. The New
		Conquest of Central Asia. New York: The American Museum of
		Natural History, 1932. https:
		//archive.org/details/newconquestofcen00andr (Accessed
		November 13, 2014). Andrews, Roy Chapman. Under a
		Lucky Star. New York: Blue Ribbon, 1943. 
		https://archive.org/details/underaluckystara006445mbp
		(Accessed January 19, 2015). Andrews, Roy Chapman.
		Meet Your Ancestors, a Biography of Primitive Man. New
		York: Viking Press, 1945. https:
		//archive.org/details/meetyourancestor00andr (Accessed
		January 19, 2015). Andrews, Roy Chapman. All About
		Dinosaurs. New York: Random House, 1953. https:
		//archive.org/details/allaboutdinosaur00andr (Accessed
		January 19, 2015). Andrews, Roy Chapman. All About
		Whales. New York: Random House, 1954. Andrews, Roy
		Chapman, and William Diller Matthew, eds. Central Asiatic
		Expeditions. Vols 1 and 2. New York: America Museum of
		Natural History, 1930. http://dx.doi.
		org/10.5962/bhl.title.12034 (Accessed January 19,
		2015). Carpenter, Kenneth. Eggs, Nests, and Baby
		Dinosaurs.  Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press,
		1999. Gallenkamp, Charles. Dragon Hunter: Roy
		Chapman Andrews and the Central Asiatic Expeditions. New
		York: Viking, 2001. Granger, Walter, William King
		Gregory, and Charles Peter Berkey. Protoceratops
		andrewsi, a Pre-ceratopsian Dinosaur from Mongolia.
		American Museum Novitates 72 (1923). http://hdl.handle.net/
		2246/4670 (Accessed January 19, 2015). Norell, Mark
		A., James M. Clark, Dashzeveg Demberelyin, Barsbold Rhinchen,
		Luis M. Chiappe, Amy R. Davidson, Malcolm C. McKenna, Perle
		Altangerel, and Michael J. Novacek. "A Theropod Dinosaur
		Embryo and the Affinities of the Flaming Cliffs Dinosaur
		Eggs." Science 266 (1994): 779–82.
Norell, Mark A., James M. Clark, Luis M. Chiappe, and
		Demberelyin Dashzeveg. "A Nesting Dinosaur."
		Nature 378 (1995): 774–6. Osborn, Henry
		Fairfield, Peter C. Kaisen, and George Olsen. "Three New
		Theropoda, Protoceratops Zone, Central Mongolia."
		American Museum Novitates 144 (1924): 1–12. 
		http://digitallibrary.amnh.org/dspace/bitstream/handle/2246/3223
		//v2/dspace/ingest/pdfSource/nov/N0144.pdf?sequence=1 
		(Accessed  November 16, 2014). Roy Chapman Andrews
		Society. http://
		roychapmanandrewssociety.org  (Accessed November 8,
		2013). Schmidt, Karl Patterson, Clifford Hillhouse
		Pope, Roy Chapman Andrews, Edmund Heller, Harry R. Caldwell, and
		Walter Granger. Notes on Chinese Reptiles. Bulletin of the
		American Museum of Natural History 54 (1927): Article 4. 
		http://digitallibrary.amnh.org/dspace/handle/2246/1754
		(Accessed January 19, 2015). van Straelen, Victor
		Émile. "The Microstructure of the Dinosaurian Egg-shells
		from the Cretaceous Beds of Mongolia." American Museum
		Novitates 173 (1925): 1–4. 
		http://digitallibrary.amnh.org/dspace/bitstream/handle/2246/4482
		//v2/dspace/ingest/pdfSource/nov/N0173.pdf?sequence=1
		(Accessed November 16, 2014).  

How to cite
Madison, Paige, "Roy Chapman Andrews (1884-1960)". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2015-01-22). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8281.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Thursday, January 29, 2015 - 18:46
 Topic
Subject
Dinosaurs; Whale; Archaeology; Anthropology, Physical; Biological Evolution; Fossils; Andrews, Roy Chapman, 1884-1960; Whales; Whales, Fossil; Dinosaurs; Natural history museums; Dinosaurs--Eggs; People