By M. Elizabeth Barnes
Published: 2014-10-21
Keywords: Developmental biology, Neoteny, Epigenesis, recapitulation, Preformationism, Cope's Law of Acceleration, Heterochrony, biogenetic law, Evo-Devo
 Ontogeny and
Phylogeny (1977), by Stephen Jay Gould Ontogeny and Phylogeny is a book published in 1977,
	in which the author Stephen J. Gould, who worked in the US, tells a history of the theory of recapitulation. A theory of
	recapitulation aims to explain the relationship between the
	embryonic development of an organism (ontogeny) and the evolution of
	that organism's species (phylogeny). Although there are several
	variations of recapitulationist theories, most claim that during
	embryonic development an organism repeats the adult stages of
	organisms from those species in it's evolutionary history. Gould
	suggests that, although fewer biologists invoked recapitulation
	theories in the twentieth century compared to those in the
	nineteenth and eighteenth centuries, some aspects of the theory of
	recapitulation remained important for understanding evolution. Gould
	notes that the concepts of acceleration and retardation during
	development entail that changes in developmental timing (heterochrony) can result in a trait appearing either earlier or later
	than normal in developmental processes. Gould argues that these
	changes in the timing of embryonic development provide the raw
	materials or novelties upon which natural selection acts.
Gould wrote Ontogeny and Phylogeny while working at
	Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts, as a professor of
	zoology. He had studied the relationship between ontogeny and
	phylogeny early in primary school in the New York City public
	schools. One of his colleagues at the American Museum of Natural
	History, Ernst Mayr, in the late 1970s encouraged him to write a
	book on the subject.
Gould noted that Ernst Haeckel in Germany proposed an 1866
	recapitulation theory that he termed the biogenetic law, and that
	biologists appealed to the law into the early decades of the
	twentieth century, after which time experimental evidence disconfirmed
	the law. Gould argues
	that the dismissal of Haeckel's biogenetic law led to a more general
	dismissal of the theory of recapitulation. Therefore, the bad
	reputation attached to the theory of recapitulation impacted the way
	scholars eventually theorized about developmental processes as part
	of the mechanism of evolution.
Ontogeny and Phylogeny is divided into two parts. The
	first part is entitled "Recapitulation" and reconstructs the history
	of the theory of recapitulation from Greek roots to Ernst Haeckel's
	biogenetic law and to its demise in the first half of the twentieth
	century. The second part is entitled "Heterochrony and
	Paedomorphosis." In this section, Gould proposes his own theories
	about the relationship between ontogeny and phylogeny and the way
	developmental processes help to explain evolution.
Part one of Ontogeny and Phylogeny begins with chapter
	two, "The Analogistic Tradition from Anaximander to Bonnet". In this
	chapter, Gould describes pre-recapitulation theories as various ways
	of paralleling ontogeny with the hierarchies of life. For example,
	some categorized the hierarchy of things as progressing from mere
	matter, to unconscious life, to the conscious animal, to the
	rational human. The ontogeny of a human repeats this hierarchy.
	Starting from the bottom of the hierarchy, the human begins as
	unformed, unconscious matter and then progresses to form complex
	living matter. Later in development, the human fetus resembles an
	animal and then finally progresses to be a rational human. For
	instance, Aristotle in ancient Greece described the sequence of development in a human
	embryo as analogous to a sequence of progressively higher souls
	unfolding inside the organism as it develops, starting with the
	vegetative or nutritive soul, then progressing to the animal or
	sensitive soul, and then finally to the human or rational soul.
Next, in the same section, Gould focuses on recapitulation theories
	of the sixteenth century and describes how embryologists attempted
	to explain ontogeny through theories either of preformationism or of
	epigenesis.  Preformationists stated that structures of adults were
	preformed in the sex cell, and merely unfolded from prebuilt
	complexity. In contrast, epigenesists hypothesized that organisms
	began formless and subsequently increased in complexity and form during
	development. Gould states that historians had characterized
	preformaitonism in an attempt to retell the history of embryology as
	a good guy (epigenesicists) and bad guy (preformationists) narrative
	in which epigenesists triumphed. However, Gould says that
	preformationist theories were much more rational and respectable
	then historians portrayed them.
In Chapter three, entitled "Transcendental Origins, 1793 – 1860,"
	Gould describes the triumph of epigenesis over preformationism and
	the subsequent rise of the theory of recapitulation in the movement called
	Naturphilosophie (philosophy of nature) in Germany during the early nineteenth century.
	Embryologists claimed that physical laws could explain all natural
	phenomena, and that motion was the only irreducible property. From
	these premises, recapitulation became a central theory because it
	relied on purely natural explanations. Gould describes in detail two
	contemporary leading theories of recapitulation by Lorenz Oken and
	Johann F. Meckel, both located in Germany.  Meckel stated in the title of his 1811 essay
	"Entwurf einer Darstellung der zwischen dem Embryozustande der
	h ö heren Tiere und dem permanenten der niederen stattfindenen
	Parallele" (Sketch of the Portrayal of the Parallels that Exist
	Between the Embryonic Stages of Higher Animals and the Adults of
	Lower Animals) that early embryonic stages of so-called higher
	animals somehow related to the adult stages of lower animals. Oken, in his 1843 Lehrbuch
	der Naturphilosophie (Textbook of Natural Philosophy),
	classified animals based on the linear addition of organs as they
	developed in the animals.
Gould next discusses Karl E. von Baer, who worked on embryos in
	Dorpat, later Tartu, Estonia. Gould shows that von Baer argued
	against the theory of recapitulation. Von Baer stated that many of
	the features present in embryonic stages are not apparent in the
	adult, and therefore one could not claim any correspondence between
	embryos belonging to different species. Von Baer's 1828 laws of
	embryology claim that embryos of one species can only resemble the
	embryonic form of ancestors, but never their ancestors' adult forms.
	Von Baer argues that organisms from different species develop from a
	common general form and then diverge from one another in a branching
	manner as development proceeds.
Chapter four, "Evolutionary Triumph, 1859–1900", discusses the period
	in which Charles Darwin introduced the theory of evolution. Before
	this theory, biologists struggled to explain the patterns
	described in Meckel's recapitulation theory. The claim that life
	 evolved from a common ancestor enabled biologists to view
	embryonic stages of animals as the actual product of those animals'
	 ancestries. Scientists developed at least two interpretations
	of the relationship between ontogeny and phylogeny. First, some
	biologists interpreted evolution with von Baer's laws of embryology.
	This interpretation described development as progressing from the
	general characters of a large group to the specialized
	characteristics of that organism's species. The second
	interpretation described embryonic stages as the adult forms of our
	ancestors. Gould notes that Darwin's embryological arguments
	for evolution in Origin of Species relied on von Baer's
	laws.
Gould then describes how the second interpretation presupposed
	two claims. First, evolutionary changes must occur through the
	addition of traits to the end of ontogeny, a claim called the
	principle of terminal addition. Second, there must be a mechanism
	that shortens ontogeny across generations, otherwise development would be much longer
	than what we observe today, a claim called the principle of
	condensation. In the latter half of the nineteenth century, many
	theories attempted to explain how terminal addition and condensation
	occurred.
In the last part of chapter four, Gould discusses Ernst Haeckel's
	theory of recapitulation, which had an evolutionary perspective.
	Evolutionary recapitulation differed from other forms of
	recapitulation as it integrates the theory of common ancestry for all organisms. Haeckel
	aimed to reconstruct phylogenetic lineages of organisms and used
	the parallels between ontogeny and phylogeny as evidence
	for his hypothesized lineages. Haeckel's biogenetic law claimed that
	phylogeny, which is the evolution and diversification of a species,
	physically caused the embryonic stages in animals'
	development. Moreover, Haeckel addressed the principles of terminal
	addition and condensation as the mechanics of recapitulation. Gould
	emphasizes how other biologists such as Edward D. Cope and Alpheus
	Hyatt, both in the US, independently proposed the biogenetic law. All
	of them proposed similar principles and laws of acceleration and
	retardation. Gould ends chapter four describing how by the late
	nineteenth century, von Baer's laws of embryology fared poorly
	amongst scientists, whereas Haeckel's biogenetic law gained
	popularity.
Chapter five, "Pervasive Influence," provides excerpts from
	doctors, poets, writers, physicists, and educators who wrote about
	recapitulation. Gould speculates that recapitulation was not just
	influential to evolutionary and developmental biologists, but also
	to much of society.
In "Decline, Fall, and Generalization," Gould describes the
	decline of the biogenetic law in the first half of the twentieth
	century, and he identifies several factors influencing the decline.
	First, he notes that the empirical critiques addressing acceleration and
	retardation  made the biogenetic law untenable. Then, Gould
	says that in the 1920s Walter Garstang, in UK, emphasized a
	contradiction in the biogenetic law: that late stages of development
	sometimes retain the juvenile characters of the ancestors. Garstang
	called this phenomena paedomorphisis, and  he described its occurrence in
	the salamanders from Mexico. Garstang argued that, as the biogenetic
	law required that adult stages of ancestors appear in the juvenile
	stages of development, it was disconfirmed by evidence of juvenile
	features of ancestors expressed in the adult forms of organisms.
	Additionally, Gould notes the difficulties that arose for the biogenetic
	law once Gregor Mendel's 1865 theory of genetics and experimental
	embryology became popular. According to Gould, once new causal
	explanations accounted for variations in the features of organisms
	within the same species, the biogenetic law became irrelevant.
Section two of Ontogeny and Phylogeny has four chapters.
	The first two chapters in this section, chapters seven and eight in
	the book, are entitled "Heterochrony and the Parallel of Ontogeny
	and Phylogeny" and "The Ecological and Evolutionary Significance of
	Heterochrony". In these chapters, Gould emphasizes the mechanics of
	developmental timing rather than the results of those processes. He
	argues that, once Haeckel's biogenetic law declined in popularity,
	it prompted the design of many complex theories about the
	connections between ontogeny and phylogeny, theories that focused on the
	results of changes in developmental timing, recapitulation and
	paedomorphosis, but did not focus on its mechanisms, acceleration
	and retardation.
Gould argues that scientists should study the processes of
	developmental timing. He identifies two processes causing
	recapitulation and paedomorphosis: acceleration and retardation of
	development. Furthermore, the ubiquitous presence of these processes
	in development shows that heterochrony constitutes the mechanics of
	evolution, as it can result in different evolutionary phenomena such
	as the number of offspring an organism has or the age at which an organism reproduces.
In "Progenesis and Neoteny" and "Human Evolution," Gould explains
	progenesis and neoteny. Progenesis occurs when the sexual maturation
	of an organism still in a juvenile stage accelerates. For example,
	some salamanders are able to reproduce during their larval life.
	Gould argues that neoteny and progenesis are adaptations to
	different ecological environments. Progenesis enables species to
	reproduce quickly and in large numbers. Neoteny, on the other hand,
	causes species to reproduce slowly and in small numbers. Progenesis
	can result in the evolution of new taxa, because it can relax the
	developmental constraints that later arise in the development of
	organisms. Gould points to neoteny as an important process in the
	development of complex social and cerebral behavior in the higher
	vertebrates. He says that the ability for an organism to delay its
	growth can lead to features that would support complex social and
	cerebral behaviors. For instance, rapid growth of the brain later in
	the development of humans could support complex cerebral functions.
	Gould claims that neoteny is the most important factor of human
	evolution.
In the decades that followed its publication, Ontogeny and
	Phylogeny became widely cited within the evolutionary and
	developmental sciences. It helped revive research on acceleration
	and retardation and sparked research about paedomorphosis as a
	possible factor affecting the evolution of the human lineage.
	Moreover, Ontogeny and Phylogeny, along with other work by
	Gould, such as "The Spandrels of san Marco and the Panglossian
	Paradigm" is often credited for influencing the rise of a biological
	approach called evolutionary developmental biology or evo-devo,
	which worked to integrate evolutionary and developmental biology.
	
 Sources Aristotle. On
		the Generation of Animals. Trans. Arthur Platt under the Editorship of J.A. Smith and W.D. Ross as Volume V of  The Works of Aristotle Translated into English Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1912. https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/a/aristotle/generation/index.html (Accessed October 9, 2014).
Cope, Edward. The Primary Factors of Organic
		Evolution. Chicago: Open Court Publishing, 1896. http://
		www.biodiversitylibrary.org/page/1959466 (Accessed April 26,
		2014).
Darwin, Charles. On the Origin of Species by Means of
		Natural Selection. London: John Murray, 1859. http://dx.doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.68064
		(Accessed October 9, 2014).
Garstang, Walter. "The Theory of Recapitulation: A Critical
		Restatement of the Biogenetic Law." Zoological Journal of the
		Linnaean Society 35 (1922): 81–101.
Gorman, James. "The History of an Idea." New York Times,
November 20, 1977. http
://www.nytimes.com/books/97/11/09/home/gould-darwin.html (Accessed
February 16, 2013).
Gould, Stephen J. Ever Since Darwin. New York: Norton &
Company, 1977.
Gould, Stephen J.  Ontogeny and Phylogeny. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1977. http://www.
sjgarchive.org/library/ontogeny.html (Accessed 17 April 2014).
Haeckel, Ernst. Generelle Morphologie der Organismen.
[General Morphology of the Organisms]. Berlin: G. Reimer, 1866. http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/22319#page/11/mode/
1up (Accessed May 4, 2012).
Hyatt, Alpheus. "Cycle in the Life of the Individual (Ontogeny) and
in the Evolution of Its Own Group (Phylogeny)." Science 5 (1897):
161–71. http://www.jstor.org/stable/20020691 (Accessed October 9, 2014).
McKinney, Michael and Kenneth McNamara. "Heterochrony, Disparity,
and Macroevolution." Paleobiology 31 (2005): 17–26.
Meckel, Johann Friedrich. "Entwurf einer Darstellung der zwischen dem Embryozustande der höheren Thiere und dem permanenten der niederen stattfindenden Parallele." [Sketch of the Portrayal of the Parallels that Exist Between the
Embryonic Stages of Higher Animals and the Adults of Lower Animals]. In Beyträge zur Vergleichenden Anatomie [Contributions to Comparative Anatomy] Vol. 2. Ed. Johann Friedrich Meckel. Leipzig: Reclam, 1811: 1–60.
Mendel, Gregor Johann. "Versuche über Pflanzen-Hybriden"
[Experiments Concerning Plant Hybrids]" [1866]. Verhandlungen des
naturforschenden Vereines in Brünn [Proceedings of the Natural
History Society of Brünn] IV (1865): 3–47. Reprinted in Fundamenta
Genetica, ed. Jaroslav Kříženecký, 15–56. Prague: Czech Academy of
Sciences, 1966. http://www.mendelweb.org/
Mendel.html (Accessed April 17, 2014).
Oken, Lorenz. Lehrbuch der Naturphilosophie. Zürich:
Schultheß, 1843. https://
archive.org/details/lehrbuchdernatu04okengoog (Accessed April 17,
2014).
von Baer, Karl Ernst. Über Entwickelungsgeschichte der
Thiere. Beobachtung und Reflexion [On the Developmental History of
Animals. Observation and Reflection]. Königsberg: Bornträger,
1828. http://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=inu.
32000003298751;page=root;view= 1up;size=100;seq=7;orient=0 (Accessed
October 3, 2012).
Wake, David. "Shape, Form, Development, Ecology, Genetics, and
Evolution." Paleobiology 4 (1978): 96–9.  

How to cite
Barnes, M. Elizabeth, "Ontogeny and Phylogeny (1977), by Stephen Jay Gould". Embryo Project Encyclopedia (2014-10-21). ISSN: 1940-5030 http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8226.

Show full item record
Publisher
Arizona State University. School of Life Sciences. Center for Biology and Society. Embryo Project Encyclopedia.

Rights
Copyright Arizona Board of Regents   Licensed as Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

Last modified
Friday, October 24, 2014 - 23:44
 Topic
Subject
 Theories; Gould, Stephen Jay; Evolution; Haeckel, Ernst, 1834-1919; Ontogeny; Embryology; Meckel, J. F. (Johann Friedrich), 1781-1833; Darwin, Charles, 1809-1882; Garstang, Walter, 1868-1949; Baer, Karl Ernst von, 1792-1876; Naturphilosophie; Phylogeny; Aristotle; Literature